Dedication


 To Catherine
                          Contents


Dedication


PART I: THE REFORMATION
Chronology
1. The Call for Reformation
2. Martin Luther: Pilgrimage to Reformation
    The Long Quest
    The Storm Breaks
3. An Uncertain Decade
    Exile, Unrest, and Rebellion
    The Diets of the Empire
4. Luther’s Theology
    The Word of God
    The Theology of the Cross
    Law and Gospel
    The Church and Sacraments
    The Two Kingdoms
5. Ulrich Zwingli and the Swiss Reformation
    Zwingli’s Pilgrimage
    The Break with Rome
    Zwingli’s Theology
6. The Radical Reformation
    The First Anabaptists
   The Revolutionary Anabaptists
   The Later Anabaptists
7. John Calvin
   Calvin’s Early Career
   The Institutes
    The Reformer of Geneva
    Calvin and Calvinism
8. The Reformation in Great Britain
    Henry VIII
    Edward VI
    Mary Tudor
    Elizabeth
    The Reformation in Scotland
9. Further Developments within Lutheranism
    The War of Schmalkalden
    The Interim
    Scandinavian Lutheranism
10. The Reformation in the Low Countries
    The Political Situation
   Protestant Preaching
   The Beggars
11. Protestantism in France
    Shifting Royal Policies
    The Massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Day
    The War of the Three Henrys
12. The Catholic Reformation
   The Reformation of Spanish Catholicism
   Polemics against Protestantism
   New Orders
    Papal Reformation
    The Council of Trent
13. Protestantism at the Edges
   Spain
   Italy
   Hungary
   Poland
14. A Convulsed Age
    Suggested Readings


PART II: ORTHODOXY, RATIONALISM, AND PIETISM
Chronology
15. An Age of Dogma and Doubt
16. The Thirty Years’ War
    The Storm Gathers
   The Course of the War
   The Peace of Westphalia
17. The Church of the Desert
18. The Puritan Revolution
   James I
   Charles I
   The Long Parliament
   Civil War
   The Protectorate
    The Restoration
19. Catholic Orthodoxy
   Gallicanism and Opposition to Papal Power
   Jansenism
   Quietism
20. Lutheran Orthodoxy
    Philippists and Strict Lutherans
    The Triumph of Orthodoxy
   Georg Calixtus and “Syncretism”
21. Reformed Orthodoxy
    Arminianism and the Synod of Dort
   The Westminster Confession
22. The Rationalist Option
    Descartes and Cartesian Rationalism
   Empiricism
   Deism
   David Hume and His Critique of Empiricism
   New Currents in France
   Immanuel Kant
23. The Spiritualist Option
    Jakob Boehme
   George Fox and the Quakers
   Emanuel Swedenborg
24. The Pietist Option
    German Pietism: Spener and Francke
   Zinzendorf and the Moravians
    John Wesley and Methodism
25. The Thirteen Colonies
   Virginia
   The Northern Puritan Colonies
   Rhode Island and the Baptists
   Catholicism in Maryland
   The Mid-Atlantic Colonies
   The Great Awakening
   Suggested Readings


PART III: BEYOND CHRISTENDOM
Chronology
26. An Age Beyond Christendom
27. A Shifting Landscape: The United States
    The Independence of the Thirteen Colonies
   Early Immigration
   The Second Great Awakening
   Manifest Destiny and the War with Mexico
   Slavery and Civil War
   From the Civil War to World War I
    New Religions
28. A Shifting Landscape: Western Europe
   The French Revolution
   The New Europe
    Developments in Great Britain
29. A Shifting Landscape: Latin America
   A Panoply of New Nations
    The Church in the New Nations
30. A Shifting Landscape: Eastern Christianity
   Byzantine Christianity
   The Russian Church
   Other Eastern Churches
   Further Shifts: The Fall of the Soviet Union
31. Protestant Theology
   New Currents of Thought
   Schleiermacher’s Theology
   Hegel’s System
   Kierkegaard’s Work
   Christianity and History
32. Catholicism in the Face of Modernity
   The Papacy and the French Revolution
   Pius IX
   Leo XIII
   Pius X
    Benedict XV to Pius XII
33. Geographic Expansion
   The Missionary Enterprise in the Age of Colonialism
   Asia and Oceania
   Africa and the Muslim World
   Latin America
   The Ecumenical Movement
34. Roman Catholic Christianity
    John XXIII and the Second Vatican Council
   From Paul VI to Benedict XVI
    Theological Developments
35. Crisis at the Center: Protestantism in Europe
   World War I and Its Aftermath
   Renewed Conflicts
   After the War
   At the Turn of the Century
36. Crisis at the Center: Protestantism in the United States
   From World War I to the Great Depression
   Through Depression and World War II
   The Postwar Decades
    A New Century
37. Vitality at the Periphery
   Asia
   Africa
   Latin America
   The Ecumenical Movement
   Third World and Other “Contextual” Theologies
    Mission from the Ends of the Earth
38. Epilogue: A Global History
   A New Map Beyong Christiandom
   The Future Shape of History
   Suggested Readings

Notes
Index


About the Author
Credits
Books by Justo L. Gonzalez
Copyright
About the Publisher
     PART I


THE REFORMATION
                                       1

                The Call for Reformation


   The dissolution is such, that the souls entrusted to the clergy receive
   great damage, for we are told that the majority of the clergy are living
   in open concubinage, and that if our justice intervenes in order to
   punish them, they revolt and create a scandal, and that they despise
   our justice to the point that they arm themselves against it.
                               ISABELLA OF CASTILE, ON NOVEMBER 20, 1500



As the fifteenth century came to a close, it was clear that the church was in
need of profound reformation, and that many longed for it. The decline and
corruption of the papacy was well known. After its residence in Avignon,
where it had served as a tool of French interests, the papacy had been
further weakened by the Great Schism, which divided Western Europe in its
allegiance to two—and even three—popes. At times, the various claimants
to the papal see seemed equally unworthy. Then, almost as soon as the
schism was healed, the papacy fell into the hands of men who were more
moved by the glories of the Renaissance than by the message of the cross.
Through war, intrigue, bribery, and licentiousness, these popes sought to
restore and even to outdo the glories of ancient Rome. As a result, while
most people still believed in the supreme authority of the Roman see, many
found it difficult to reconcile their faith in the papacy with their distrust for
its actual occupants.
     Corruption, however, was not limited to the leadership in Rome. The
councils that had been convened as a means to reform and to end the Great
Schism were able to end the schism, but not to bring about the needed
reformation. Furthermore, even in ending the schism the conciliar
movement showed its own flaws, for there were soon two rival councils—
just as before there had been two or even three rival popes, and conciliarism
had failed miserably in the task of bringing about the much-needed reform.
One of the reasons for such failure was that several of the bishops sitting in
the councils were themselves among those who profited from the existing
corruption. Thus, while the hopeful conciliarist reformers issued anathemas
and decrees against absenteeism, pluralism, and simony—the practice of
buying and selling ecclesiastical positions—many who sat on the councils
were guilty of such practices, and were not ready to give them up.
     Such corrupt leadership set the tone for most of the lesser clergy and the
monastics. While clerical celibacy was the law of the church, there were
many who broke it openly; and bishops and local priests alike—and even
some popes—flaunted their illegitimate children. The ancient monastic
discipline was increasingly relaxed as convents and monasteries became
centers of leisurely living. Monarchs and the high nobility often provided
for their illegitimate offspring by having them named abbots and abbesses,
with no regard for their monastic vocation or lack of it. The commitment to
learning for which monastic houses had been famous also declined, and the
educational requirements for the local clergy fell to practically nil.
     The conciliar movement had waned, and with it also the hope that a
general council of the church could produce the much-needed reformation.
A sign of this was the Fifth Lateran Council, which was convoked by Pope
Julius II, supposedly in order to reform the church, but in truth in an effort
to regain the political control the papacy had been losing. The council
convened in 1512, and by the time it disbanded in 1517 it had achieved
little beyond decreeing an extraordinary taxation to span the next three
years—theoretically, in order to raise funds for a new crusade—reaffirming
the authority of the pope in the face of French attempts to limit such
authority, and insisting on the power and dignity of bishops and other
prelates. It should be noted that the council adjourned in March of 1517, a
few months before the beginning of the Protestant Reformation.
    In such circumstances, even the many priests and monastics who wished
to be faithful to their calling found this to be exceedingly difficult. How
could one practice asceticism and contemplation in a monastery that had
become a house of leisure and a meeting place for fashionable soirées?
How could a priest resist corruption in his parish, when he himself had been
forced to buy his position? How could the laity trust a sacrament of penance
administered by a member of the clergy who seemed to have no sense of the
enormity of sin? The religious conscience of Europe was divided within
itself, torn between trust in a church that had been its spiritual mother for
generations, and the patent failures of that church.
    But it was not only at the moral level that the church seemed to be in
need of reformation. Some among the more thoughtful Christians were
becoming convinced that the teachings of the church had also gone astray.
The fall of Constantinople, half a century earlier, had flooded Western
Europe, and Italy in particular, with scholars whose views were different
from those that were common in the West. The manuscripts these scholars
brought with them alerted Western scholars to the many changes and
interpolations that had taken place in the copying and recopying of ancient
texts. New philosophical outlooks were also introduced. Greek became
more commonly known among Western scholars, who could now compare
the Greek text of the New Testament with the commonly used Latin
Vulgate. From such quarters came the conviction that it was necessary to
return to the sources of the Christian faith, and that this would result in a
reformation of existing doctrine and practice.
    Although most who held such views were by no means radical, their call
for a return to the sources tended to confirm the earlier appeals by reformers
such as Wycliffe and Huss. The desire for a reformation in the doctrine of
the church did not seem so out of place if it were true that such doctrine had
changed through the centuries, straying from the New Testament. The many
followers of those earlier reformers still had in England, Bohemia, and
other areas now felt encouraged by scholarship which, while not agreeing
with them on their more radical claims, confirmed their basic tenet: that it
was necessary to return to the sources of Christianity, particularly through
the study of Scripture.
    To this was added the discontent of the masses, which earlier had found
expression in apocalyptic movements like the one led by Hans Böhm. The
economic conditions of the masses, far from improving, had worsened in
the preceding decades. The peasants in particular were increasingly
exploited by the landowners. While some monastic houses and church
leaders still practiced acts of charity, most of the poor no longer had the
sense that the church was their defender. On the contrary, the
ostentatiousness of prelates, their power as landowners, and their support of
increasing inequality were seen by many as a betrayal of the poor, and
eventually as a sign that the Antichrist had gained possession of the church.
The ferment brewing in such quarters periodically broke out in peasant
revolts, apocalyptic visions, and calls for a new order.
    Meanwhile, the ancient feudal system was coming to an end. First
France, and then England and Spain, saw the development of powerful
monarchies that forced the nobility to serve the ends of the nation as a
whole. The sovereigns of such states felt the need to limit and control the
power of the prelates, many of whom were also feudal rulers of vast areas.
As France had earlier led in the suppression of the Templars, Spain now felt
compelled to bring the ancient military orders, such as Calatrava and
Santiago, under royal supremacy; and to that end King Ferdinand was made
their grand master. Areas that did not enjoy the same unity, such as the
Netherlands and Germany, seethed with nationalist discontent and dreams
of union and independence. Latin, which earlier had been a common bond
for much of Western Europe, was increasingly limited to ecclesiastical and
scholarly circles, while the various vernacular languages came to be
regarded as equally respectable. Indeed, the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries
were the formative period for most of the literary languages of Western
Europe. Nationalism, which had begun to develop centuries earlier, found
expression in these languages, and soon became the order of the day, both
in those nations that had achieved political unity and in those that still
fretted under feudal disunion and foreign dominance. Such sentiments in
turn undermined the ancient dream of “one flock under one shepherd,”
which now appeared to many as little more than an excuse for foreign
intervention.
The Convento de Santo Domingo, in Avila, served as the headquarters for Torquemada’s inquisitorial
                                           activities.

    In some areas, the growing power of the monarchs, the divergent
opinions and ideas in a time of intellectual unrest, and frustration with the
actual life of the church, led to an increase in the powers and activities of
the Inquisition. Already in the Middle Ages it was not uncommon for
bishops to act as inquisitors, investigating the theological opinions of their
flocks, seeking to correct those whose views were considered heretical, and
severely punishing the teachers and leaders who espoused those views. But
in the fifteenth century, particularly in Spain, the powers and activity of the
Inquisition rose to new heights. The Inquisition, normally under papal
authority and in the later Middle Ages used mostly as a tool of papal policy,
was placed by the pope under the authority of Ferdinand and Isabella. The
Dominican friar Tomás de Torquemada, who was known for his
uncompromising love for orthodoxy, was appointed to head the Inquisition
in Castile, and his name has become famous for the zeal with which he
persecuted those whom he considered heretics. These were mostly Jews
who had been converted under duress, and who were now accused of
“Judaizing.”
  The tortures of the Inquisition included a form of what later would be called “water-boarding.”

    As we shall see, at that time there was a concerted effort to reform the
church on the part of Queen Isabella and her confessor Francisco Jiménez
de Cisneros. During Isabella’s reign, and with the firm encouragement of
Jiménez, the pressure on Jews and “Judaizing” Christians became
increasingly severe. Finally, in 1492, it was decreed that all Jews must
either accept baptism or leave all territories under Isabella and Ferdinand.
Most refused to be baptized, even though it meant exile and the loss of most
of their possessions. Although exact figures are not available, it seems that
approximately two hundred thousand Spaniards of the Jewish faith were
thus condemned to exile—which in many cases led to death, capture by
pirates, and other such misfortunes.
    Shortly before the promulgation of the royal decree against Jews,
Granada had fallen to Castilian arms. This was the last Moorish stronghold
in the peninsula, and the terms of surrender included freedom for the
Muslims to continue practicing their religion. But soon Jiménez and his
representatives were seeking the forced conversion of the Moors, who saw
no alternative but rebellion. This was drowned in blood. But resistance
continued, and eventually it was decreed that all Moors had to choose
between baptism and exile. When it became clear that there would be a
massive exodus, a new edict was issued, forbidding the Moors from leaving
the country, and forcing baptism on them. After such unwilling conversions,
the Inquisition was kept busy tracking down those who persisted in their
Muslim beliefs and practices. Jiménez, who had been made Inquisitor
General, took this task to heart. In 1516, after the death of both Ferdinand
and Isabella, he was also made regent, and sought to use his power to force
the “converted” Moors to abandon their traditional garb and other customs.
In this he failed, and again the kingdom was shaken by rebellion and
bloodshed.
   Then came the Protestant Reformation and the “discovery” of the New
World, and both led to broader actions by the Inquisition. As we shall see,
in Europe this was part of the Catholic Reformation, which used the
Inquisition as one of its tools to prevent the spread of Protestantism. In the
New World, the powers of the Inquisition were eventually employed also to
prevent and punish interlopers from other European nations.
   The means of torture used during the Inquisition, and the manner in
which it was exploited for political reasons as well as for personal gain and
vengeance, are well known, and their memory would long survive as a
prime example of the dangers and consequences of religious extremism and
obscurantism.
 An old world was passing away, and a new one was being born to take its place. In this illustration
from one of Galileo’s works, he is depicted as discussing the universe with Ptolemy and Copernicus.

   While it does not justify it, the context within which the Inquisition took
place must be understood, including other momentous events that were
changing Western Europe’s worldview and creating an atmosphere of both
expectation and uncertainty. New worlds were being discovered beyond the
Western horizon. Travel to the Far East was becoming increasingly
common. The flat earth around which the sun and the stars revolved became
a relic of the past. Great advances were being made in medicine,
mathematics, and physics. And all this was made readily available to
scholars in various areas by means of the printing press, which was coming
into its own precisely at that time.
   An old world was passing away, and a new one was being born. It was
unavoidable that the church too would feel the impact of the new times and
that, just as new ways of being human were emerging, new ways of being
Christian would also emerge. Exactly how this was to be done, however,
was open to debate. Some sought to reform the old church from within,
while others lost all hope for such reformation, and openly broke with the
papacy. In an age of such turmoil, many sincere Christians went through
profound soul searching that eventually led them to conclusions and
positions they could not have predicted. Others, equally sincere and devout,
came to opposite conclusions. The resulting disagreements and conflict
marked the entire age that we now call the Reformation of the sixteenth
century.
   As the Middle Ages drew to a close, many advocates of reform were
convinced that the greatest ill of the church was the obscurantism of what
soon would be called the Dark Ages. The printing press, the influx of
Byzantine scholars, and the rediscovery of the artistic and literary legacies
of antiquity gave credence to the hope that the furtherance of scholarship
and education would produce the much-needed reformation of the church.
If at some point in the past centuries practices had been introduced that
were contrary to original Christian teaching, it seemed reasonable to
surmise that a return to the sources of Christianity—both biblical and
patristic—would do away with such practices.
   This was the program of the humanist reformers. In this context, the
term humanist does not refer primarily to those who value human nature
above all else, but rather to those who devote themselves to the
“humanities,” seeking to restore the literary glories of antiquity. The
humanists of the sixteenth century differed greatly from one another, but all
agreed in their love of classical letters. Long before the Protestant
Reformation broke out, there was a large network of humanists who carried
a vast correspondence among themselves and who hoped that their work
would result in the reformation of the church. Their acknowledged leader,
respected by many and known as the Prince of Humanists, was Desiderius
Erasmus of Rotterdam.
   Erasmus was the illegitimate offspring of a priest and a physician’s
daughter, and throughout his life felt burdened by his humble origins.
Reared in the midst of the bustling commercial activity of Holland, his
opinions came to reflect the common values of the bourgeoisie: tolerance,
moderation, stability, and so forth. He studied some scholastic theology, but
soon came to despise its excessive subtlety and seemingly idle curiosity. He
then decided to turn his attention to classical literature, which was enjoying
a revival of interest. In a later visit to England, he became part of a circle of
humanists interested in the reformation of the church, and these introduced
him to the study of Scripture and of early Christian literature, which he saw
as captive to the scholastics. It was at that time that he decided to perfect his
rudimentary knowledge of Greek, which he soon mastered. Meanwhile, he
published the Enchiridion militis Christiani—Dagger (or Handbook) of the
Christian Soldier. There, using military metaphors, he expounded on what
he took to be the Christian life, and the resources available to the “soldier of
Christ.”
 Erasmus, the “prince of humanists,” as Albrecht Dürer saw him in 1526. The Greek words affirm
             that the works of Erasmus himself convey a better portrait than Dürer’s.

    As a young man, Erasmus had studied under the Brethren of the
Common Life, and their “modern devotion” had had a profound impact on
him. Now, combining the humanist spirit to that devotion, he came to
describe Christianity as above all a decent, moderate, and balanced life. The
commandments of Jesus he saw as similar to the best precepts of Stoicism
and Platonism: Their purpose is to subject passion to the rule of reason.
This is to be achieved through a fairly ascetic discipline, although this
discipline must not be confused with monasticism. The monastic withdraws
from the common life of the world; the true “soldier of Christ” trains for
practical and daily life in the midst of human affairs. What the church
needs, in order to be reformed, is for Christians to practice this discipline,
and to abandon the vices of the pagans. In this reference to pagan vices,
Erasmus had in mind the evil example set by the popes of the Renaissance,
who had preferred comparison with Jupiter or with Julius Caesar than with
Jesus or St. Peter. He therefore rejected the pomp and the quest for earthly
glories that characterized much of the life of the church in his time, and
called for a lifestyle of greater simplicity. This did not mean, however, a
mere revival of the monastic spirit. He had much to say against monks and
monasteries, which had become havens of idleness and ignorance. But he
also rejected the monastic ideal as based on the unacceptable distinction
between the precepts of Jesus, which all must obey, and his “counsels of
perfection,” addressed to monastics in particular. Such distinction, while
encouraging some to radical obedience, implied that common Christians
were somehow not also “soldiers of Christ,” called to complete obedience.
    Erasmus viewed such obedience as more important than doctrine. He did
believe that doctrines were significant, and he held to traditional Christian
orthodoxy on matters such as the incarnation and the Trinity. But he insisted
that righteousness was more important than orthodoxy, and he frequently
attacked friars who were capable of subtle theological discussions but
whose lives were scandalous.
    On the other hand, the true Christian life is one of inwardness.
Profoundly influenced by Platonism—and by ancient Christian writers who
had suffered the same influence—Erasmus was convinced that the Christian
struggle was an inner one. While outward means, such as the sacraments,
were important and should not be discarded, their significance was in their
inner meaning, in the message they conveyed to the secret heart of the
believer. As he would say of baptism, “what good is it to be outwardly
sprinkled with holy water, if one is filthy within?”
    In short, what Erasmus sought was the reformation of customs, the
practice of decency and moderation, an inner devotion shaped by learning
and meditation, and a church that encouraged these things. Although his
birth was quite humble, he eventually won the admiration of scholars
throughout Europe who shared similar hopes, and whose mouthpiece he
became. Among his admirers were many in the nobility and even some
crowned heads. His followers served as secretaries and mentors in some of
the most powerful courts in Europe. The reformation he advocated seemed
about to take place.
    Then the Protestant Reformation broke out. Spirits were inflamed.
Tolerance and moderation became increasingly difficult. It was no longer a
matter of reforming customs, or of clarifying some aspects of Christian
theology that might have gone astray, but rather of radically shifting some
of the fundamental premises of traditional Christianity. Partisans on both
sides sought the support of Erasmus, who preferred to stay out of a conflict
in which passion seemed to have replaced reason. Eventually, he broke with
Luther and his followers, as we shall see later on. But still he refused to
support the Catholics in their attacks against the Protestants. To the very
end, he had admirers in both camps but very few followers. From his study,
while others called for inquisitorial intolerance, he continued calling for
tolerance and moderation, for a reformation after the humanist design, and
for the ancient virtues of the Stoics and the Platonists. Few paid heed to
him, at least during his lifetime, and he would complain, “I detest
dissension, because it goes both against the teachings of Christ and against
a secret inclination of nature. I doubt that either side in the dispute can be
suppressed without grave loss. It is clear that many of the reforms for which
Luther calls are urgently needed. My only wish is that now that I am old I
be allowed to enjoy the results of my efforts. But both sides reproach me
and seek to coerce me. Some claim that since I do not attack Luther I agree
with him, while the Lutherans declare that I am a coward who has forsaken
the gospel.”1 But centuries later, after passions had subsided, both
Protestants and Catholics would agree that his was a great mind and a great
heart, and that all had something to learn from him
                                     2

           Martin Luther: Pilgrimage to
                  Reformation


   Many have taken the Christian faith to be a simple and easy matter,
   and have even numbered it among the virtues. This is because they
   have not really experienced it, nor have they tested the great strength
   of faith.


MARTIN LUTHER

Throughout the history of Christianity, few have been the object of as
much debate as Martin Luther has been. Some describe him as the ogre who
destroyed the unity of the church, the wild boar that trampled the Lord’s
vineyard, a renegade monk who spent his life shattering the very
foundations of monasticism. For others, he is the great hero through whose
efforts the preaching of the pure gospel was restored, the champion of
biblical truth, and the reformer of a corrupt and apostate church. In recent
years, however, there has been a growing mutual understanding among
Christians of different persuasions. As a result of more balanced studies of
Luther, Catholics as well as Protestants have been led to amend opinions
that had resulted, not from historical research, but from the heat of
polemics. Now few doubt Luther’s sincerity, and many Catholic historians
affirm that his protest was amply justified, and that he was right on many
points of doctrine. On the other hand, few Protestant historians continue to
view Luther as the gigantic hero who almost single-handedly reformed
Christianity, and whose sins and errors were only of minor importance.
    Luther appears to have been an erudite and studious man who was also
uncouth and even rude in his manner. Perhaps this helped him express his
very profound theological points in a manner that found ready response
among the masses. He was sincere in his faith to the point that it became a
passion burning within him, which he could also be vulgar in expressing.
Nothing mattered to him as much as his faith and his obedience to God.
Once he became convinced that God wished him to pursue a certain course
of action, he followed it to its ultimate consequences. He was clearly not the
sort of disciple who, having put a hand to the plow, looks back. His use of
language—both Latin and German—was masterful, although he was
inclined to underline the importance of a particular assertion by
exaggerating it to the point of distortion. Once convinced of the truth of his
cause, he was ready to face the most powerful lords of his time. But the
very depth of his conviction, his passionate stance on truth, and his
tendency to exaggerate led him to utter expressions and take positions that
he or his followers would later regret.
This painting by Lucas Cranach (1526), now in the National Museum of Stockholm, is probably the
                            most authentic extant portrait of Luther.

    On the other hand, much of Luther’s impact was due to circumstances
that he neither created nor controlled, and of whose role in the process of
reformation he himself was only dimly aware. The invention of the
movable type printing press gave his writings a widespread audience they
otherwise would not have had—in fact, Luther was the first to make full use
of the value of printing as a medium for propaganda, and to write with the
printed page in mind. The growing German nationalist sentiment of which
he himself partook offered unexpected but very valuable support. Many
humanists who hoped for reformation, while disagreeing with many of
Luther’s tenets and methods, insisted that he should not be condemned
without a hearing, as had happened earlier to John Huss. Political
circumstances at the outset of the Reformation also prevented Luther’s
immediate condemnation, and by the time civil and ecclesiastic authorities
were ready to intervene it was too late to quiet the storm. On studying
Luther’s life and work, one thing is clear: the much-needed reformation
took place, not because Luther decided that it would be so, but rather
because the time was ripe for it, and because the Reformer and many others
with him were ready to fulfill their historical responsibility.

                             THE LONG QUEST
Luther was born in 1483, in Eisleben, Germany. His father, of peasant
origin, had first become a miner and then the owner of several foundries.
Young Martin’s childhood was not a happy one. His parents were extremely
severe, and many years later he would still speak bitterly of some of the
punishments he had suffered. Throughout his life he was prey to periods of
depression and anxiety, and some scholars suggest that this was due to the
excessive austerity of his early years. His first experiences at school were
no better, and he later spoke of having been whipped for not knowing his
lessons. Although the importance of such early experiences ought not be
exaggerated as the sole explanation for the course of Luther’s life, there is
no doubt that they left a deep imprint on his character.
    In July 1505, when almost twenty-two years of age, Luther joined the
Augustinian monastery at Erfurt. Many causes led to this decision. Two
weeks earlier, in the midst of a thunderstorm, he had felt overwhelmed by
the fear of death and hell, and he had promised St. Anne that he would
become a monk. According to his own later explanation, it was his harsh
upbringing that led him to the monastery. His father had planned for him a
career in law, and had not spared efforts so that he could have the necessary
education. But Luther had no desire to become a lawyer, and therefore it is
possible that Luther, though not entirely aware of his motives, was
interposing a monastic vocation between his father’s plans and his own
inclinations. Upon hearing of his son’s decision, the older Luther was
incensed, and took his own good time in forgiving what appeared to him as
a betrayal of his lofty goals for his son. Ultimately, however, Luther was led
to the monastery by a concern for his own salvation. The theme of salvation
and damnation permeated the atmosphere in which he lived. The present
life was little more than a preparation and testing for the one to come. It
seemed foolish to devote oneself to gaining prestige and riches in the
present, through the practice of law, to the detriment of life everlasting.
Luther therefore entered the monastery as a faithful child of the church,
with the clear purpose of making use of the means of salvation offered by
that church, of which the surest was the monastic life of renunciation.
   During the year of his novitiate, Luther was convinced that he had made
a wise decision, for he felt happy and at peace with God. His superiors
promptly recognized his unusual abilities, and decided that he should
become a priest. Luther himself later wrote about the overwhelming
experience of celebrating his first mass, when he was gripped by terror
upon thinking that he was holding and offering nothing less than the very
body of Christ. That feeling of terror then became increasingly frequent, for
he felt unworthy of God’s love, and he was not convinced that he was doing
enough to be saved. God seemed to him a severe judge—much the same as
his father and his teachers had been at an earlier time—who, in the final
judgment, would ask for an account and find him wanting. In order to be
saved from the wrath of such a God, one must make use of all the means of
grace offered by the church.
   But those means were not sufficient for someone as deeply religious,
sincere, and passionate as Luther. Good works and the sacrament of
penance were supposed to suffice for the young friar’s need to be justified
before God. But they did not. Luther had an overpowering sense of his own
sinfulness, and the more he sought to overcome it, the more he became
aware of sin’s sway over him. It is mistaken to suppose that he was not a
good monk, or that his life was licentious or immoral. On the contrary, he
sought to obey his monastic vows to the fullest. He would repeatedly punish
his body, as recommended by the great teachers of monasticism. And he
went to confession as often as possible. But such practices did not allay his
fear of damnation. If sins had to be confessed to be forgiven, there was
always the horrifying possibility that he might forget some sin, and thus
lose the reward after which he was so diligently striving. He therefore spent
hours listing and examining all his thoughts and actions, and the more he
studied them the more sin he found in them. There were times when, at the
very moment of leaving the confessional, he realized that there was some
sin that he had not confessed. He would then grow anxious and even
desperate, for sin was clearly more than conscious actions or thoughts. It
was a condition, a way of being, something that went far beyond the
individual sins one could confess to a priest. Thus, the very sacrament of
penance, which was supposed to bring relief to his sense of sinfulness,
actually exacerbated it, leaving him in a state of despair.
    His spiritual advisor then recommended the reading of the great teachers
of mysticism. As we have already seen, toward the end of the Middle Ages
(partially as a response to the corruption of the church) there was a great
upsurge in mystical piety, which offered an alternative path through which
to approach God. Luther resolved to follow that path, not because he
doubted the authority of the church, but because that authority, in the person
of his confessor, advised him to do so.
    Mysticism captivated him for a time—as monasticism had earlier.
Perhaps here he would find the path to salvation. But soon that path became
another blind alley. The mystics affirmed that all one had to do was to love
God, and that all the rest would follow as a result of that love. This was a
word of liberation for Luther, for it was no longer necessary to keep a strict
account of all his sins, as he had so eagerly endeavored to do, to be
rewarded only by failure and despair. But he soon discovered that loving
God was not an easy matter. If God was like his father and his teachers,
who had beaten him to the point of drawing blood, how could he love such
a God? Eventually, Luther came to the terrifying conclusion that what he
felt for God was not love, but hatred!
    There was no way out of such difficulties. In order to be saved, one must
confess one’s sins, and Luther had discovered that, in spite of his best
efforts, his sin went far beyond what he could confess. If, as the mystics
claimed, it sufficed to love God, this was no great help, for Luther had to
acknowledge that he could not love the just God that demanded an account
of all his actions.
    At that point, his confessor, who was also the superior, took a bold step.
Normally, one would suppose that a priest who was going through such a
crisis as Luther’s should not be made a pastor and teacher for others. But
that was precisely what his confessor decided he should be. Centuries
earlier, Jerome had found in his Hebrew studies an escape from temptation.
Although Luther’s problems were different from Jerome’s, perhaps study,
teaching, and pastoral responsibilities would have a similar effect on him.
Therefore, Luther was ordered, much against his expectations, to prepare to
teach Scripture at the new University of Wittenberg.
    Protestant folklore has it that as a friar Luther did not know the Bible,
and that it was only at the time of his conversion, or shortly before, that he
began to study it. This is false. As a monk who had to follow the traditional
hours of prayer, Luther knew the Psalter by heart. Besides, in 1512, after
studies that included the Bible, he received his doctorate in theology.
    When Luther found himself forced to prepare lectures on the Bible, he
began seeing new meanings in it, along with the possibility that such
meanings would provide an answer to his spiritual quest. In 1513, he began
to lecture on the Psalms. Since he had spent years reciting the Psalter,
always within the context of the liturgical year—which centers on the main
events in the life of Christ—Luther interpreted the Psalms Christologically.
When the Psalmist speaks in the first person, Luther took this to be Christ
speaking about himself. Therefore, in the Psalter, Luther saw Christ
undergoing trials similar to his own. This was the beginning of his great
discovery. By itself, it could have led Luther to the commonly held notion
that, while God the Father exacts obedience and righteousness, God the Son
loves us and works for our forgiveness. But Luther had studied theology,
and knew that such dichotomy within the Godhead was unacceptable.
Therefore, while he found consolation in Christ’s sufferings, this did not
suffice to cure his anguish and despair.
    The great discovery probably came in 1515, when Luther began
lecturing on the Epistle to the Romans. He later declared that it was in the
first chapter of that epistle that he found the solution to his difficulties. That
solution did not come easily. It was not simply a matter of opening the
Bible one day and reading that “the just shall live by faith.” As he tells the
story, the great discovery followed a long struggle and bitter anguish, for
Romans 1:17 begins by declaring that, in the gospel, “the righteousness of
God is revealed.” According to this text, the gospel is the revelation of the
righteousness—the justice—of God. But it was precisely the justice of God
that Luther found unbearable. How could such a message be gospel, good
news? For Luther, good news would have been that God is not just,
meaning that God does not judge sinners. But, in Romans 1:17, the good
news and the justice of God are indissolubly linked. Luther hated the very
phrase “the justice of God,” and spent day and night seeking to understand
the relationship between the two parts of that single verse, which, after
declaring that in the gospel “the justice of God is revealed,” affirms that
“the righteous shall live by faith.”
   The answer was surprising. Luther came to the conclusion that the
“justice of God” does not refer, as he had been taught, to the punishment of
sinners. It means rather that the “justice” or “righteousness” of the righteous
is not their own, but God’s. The “righteousness of God” is that which is
given to those who live by faith. It is given, not because they are righteous,
nor because they fulfill the demands of divine justice, but simply because
God wishes to give it. Thus, Luther’s doctrine of “justification by faith”
does not mean that what God demands of us is faith, as if this were
something we have to do or achieve, and which God then rewards. It means
rather that both faith and justification are the work of God, a free gift to
sinners. As a result of this discovery, Luther tells us, “I felt that I had been
born anew and that the gates of heaven had been opened. The whole of
Scripture gained a new meaning. And from that point on the phrase ‘the
justice of God’ no longer filled me with hatred, but rather became
unspeakably sweet by virtue of a great love.”

                         THE STORM BREAKS
Although later events revealed another side to his personality, until this time
Luther seems to have been quite reserved, devoted to his studies and to his
spiritual struggle. His great discovery, while bringing him to a new
understanding of the gospel, did not immediately lead him to protest against
the church’s interpretation of Christianity. On the contrary, our friar
continued in his teaching and pastoral duties and, although there are
indications that he taught what he had recently learned, he did not frame it
in opposition to the traditional teaching of the church. Moreover, he does
not seem to have been aware of the radical contradiction between his
discovery and the entire penitential system that was so fundamental to
accepted theology and piety.
   Through quiet persuasion, Luther brought most of his colleagues at the
University of Wittenberg over to his way of thinking. When he became
convinced that he must challenge traditional views, he composed ninety-
seven theses designed to be debated in an academic setting. He wrote these
theses in Latin, the language of the academy, and in them he attacked
several of the main tenets of scholastic theology. He clearly expected that
their publication and debate would cause a stir, allowing him to divulge his
great discovery. But, much to his surprise, the theses and the debate on
them aroused little interest beyond the university itself. It seemed that the
notion that the gospel was entirely other than was commonly thought,
which Luther took to be of paramount importance, was received with little
more than a great yawn.
    Then the unexpected happened. Luther wrote another set of theses, also
in Latin, with no expectation that they would have more impact than the
previous ones. But someone translated them into German, and circulated
them in an inexpensive edition. The result created such a stir that eventually
all of Christendom was involved in its consequences. The reason for this
very different reaction was that these other theses—officially titled Ninety-
Five Theses on the Power and Efficacy of Indulgences, now commonly
known as Luther’s Ninety-five Theses—attacked the sale of indulgences and
its theological presuppositions. With little awareness of what he was doing,
or whom he was attacking, Luther had spoken against plans for profit
designed by very powerful lords and prelates.
    The particular sale of indulgences that prompted Luther’s protest had
been authorized by Pope Leo X, and also involved the economic and
political ambitions of the powerful house of Hohenzollern, which aspired to
hegemony in Germany. One of its members, Albert of Brandenburg, was
already in possession of two episcopal sees, and hoped to acquire the most
important archbishopric in Germany, that of Mainz. He began negotiations
with Leo X, one of the worst popes in an age filled with corrupt, avaricious,
and indolent popes. The result was an agreement whereby, for the sum of
ten thousand ducats, Albert could have what he requested. Since this was a
considerable sum, the pope also authorized Albert to announce a great sale
of indulgences in his territories, on the condition that half of the proceeds
would be sent to the papal coffers. Leo was concerned with the need to
refurbish Rome where, as a result of the Great Schism and of the warring
inclinations of some of the popes of the Renaissance, many beautiful
buildings showed signs of neglect. One of his dreams was to finish building
the Basilica of Saint Peter, begun earlier by Julius II, and for this he needed
the funds that he hoped to receive from Albert’s sale of indulgences. Thus,
the refurbishment of the great basilica that is now the pride of Roman
Catholicism indirectly helped foment the Protestant Reformation.
    The man put in charge of the sale of indulgences in Germany was the
Dominican John Tetzel, an unscrupulous man who was willing to make
scandalous claims about his wares as long as such claims would help sales.
Thus, for instance, Tetzel and his preachers were heard announcing that the
indulgences that they sold made the sinner “cleaner than when coming out
of baptism,” and “cleaner than Adam before the Fall,” and that “the cross of
the seller of indulgences has as much power as the cross of Christ.” Those
who wished to buy an indulgence for a loved one who was deceased were
promised that, “as soon as the coin in the coffer rings, the soul from
purgatory springs.”
    Such claims aroused the indignation of many among the learned, who
knew that Tetzel and his preachers were misrepresenting the doctrine of the
church. Among humanists, who bemoaned the prevailing ignorance and
superstition, Tetzel’s preaching was seen as another example of the deep
corruption of the church. Others who were imbued with the growing
German nationalist sentiment saw Tetzel’s campaign as one more instance
in which Rome was fleecing the German people, exploiting their credulity
in order to squander the results on feasts and luxury. But such sentiments
were only quietly expressed, and the sale went on.
    It was at that point that Luther nailed his famous Ninety-five Theses to
the door of the castle church in Wittenberg. His theses, written in Latin,
were not calculated to cause a great religious commotion, as he had hoped
would be the case with his earlier theses. After his previous experience, he
seems to have thought that such issues were important only to theologians
and that his new set of theses would not be read or debated beyond
academic circles. But these Ninety-five Theses, written with a deep sense of
righteous indignation, were much more devastating than the earlier ones.
While addressing fewer theological issues, they did evoke a positive
response from those who resented the exploitation of Germany by foreign
interests—and by Germans such as the Hohenzollerns in connivance with
those interests. Also, in concretely attacking the sale of indulgences, Luther
was endangering the profits and designs of the pope and of the house of
Hohenzollern. And, although his attack was relatively moderate, Luther
went beyond the question of the efficacy of indulgences, and pointed to the
exploitation that stood at the heart of it. According to Luther: if it is true
that the pope is able to free souls from purgatory, he ought to use that
power, not for trivial reasons such as the building of a church, but simply
out of love, and freely (thesis 82). In truth, the pope should give his money
to the poor from whom the sellers of indulgences wring their last coins, and
he ought to do this even if it were to require selling the Basilica of Saint
Peter (thesis 51).




              A copy of one of the indulgences against which Luther protested.

    Luther published his theses on the Eve of All Saints, and their impact
was such that that very date, October 31, 1517, is often said to mark the
beginning of the Protestant Reformation. Printers soon spread copies of the
Ninety-five Theses throughout Germany, in both their original Latin text and
in a German translation. Luther sent a copy to Albert of Brandenburg
personally, with a very respectful cover letter. Albert sent both the theses
and the letter to Rome, asking Pope Leo to intervene. Emperor Maximilian
was enraged at the impertinence of the upstart friar, and he too asked Leo to
silence Luther. Meanwhile, Luther published an extensive explanation of
the theses, clarifying what he had meant in those very brief propositions,
but sharpening his attack on indulgences, and expounding on parts of the
theological stance on which he based his protest.
    The pope’s response was to ask the Augustinian Order to deal with the
matter, for Luther was one of its members. The Reformer was called to the
order’s next chapter meeting, in Heidelberg. He went in fear for his life, for
he expected to be condemned and burned as a heretic. But he was surprised
to find that many of his fellow friars favored his teachings, and that some of
the younger ones were even enthusiastic about it. Others saw the dispute
between Luther and Tetzel as one more instance of the ancient rivalry
between Dominicans and Augustinians, and therefore refused to abandon
their champion. Eventually, Luther was able to return to Wittenberg,
strengthened by the support of his order, and encouraged by those whom he
had won to his cause.
    The pope then attempted a different tack. The Imperial Diet—the
assembly of the princes and nobles—was scheduled to meet in Augsburg,
with Emperor Maximilian presiding over it. As his legate to that gathering,
Leo sent Cardinal Cajetan, a man of vast erudition whose main task was to
convince the German princes to undertake a crusade against the Turks, who
were threatening Western Europe, and to agree to a tax for the support of
that enterprise. Fear of the Turkish threat was such that Rome was seeking
reconciliation with the Hussites in Bohemia, and was even willing to accept
some of the conditions they imposed. As a secondary task, Cajetan was also
instructed to meet with Luther and force him to recant. If the friar proved
obstinate, he was to be sent as a prisoner to Rome.
    Luther’s ruling prince, Frederick the Wise, elector of Saxony, secured
from Emperor Maximilian a safe-conduct for Luther. The latter, however,
put little trust in the imperial word, remembering that little more than a
century before, under similar circumstances and in violation of an imperial
safe-conduct, John Huss had been burned at Constance. But in spite of this,
he went to Augsburg, convinced that he would not die unless God willed it.
    The meeting with Cajetan did not go well. The cardinal refused to
discuss Luther’s teachings, and demanded that he simply recant. The friar,
for his part, declared that he was willing to withdraw what he had said, if he
could only be convinced that he was wrong. When he learned that Cajetan
did not have to debate the issues at stake, because he was armed with the
pope’s authority to arrest him, Luther secretly left Augsburg at night and
returned to Wittenberg, where he issued an appeal to a general council.
    During all this time, Luther had been able to count on the protection of
Frederick the Wise, Elector of Saxony and therefore the lord of Wittenberg.
At this point, Frederick felt compelled to protect Luther, not because he was
convinced of the truth of the friar’s teachings, but simply because justice
demanded that he be given a hearing and a fair trial. Above all else,
Frederick wished to be known and remembered as a wise and just ruler.
With that end in mind, he had founded the University of Wittenberg, where
many professors supported Luther, and told him that he was by no means a
heretic. At least until Luther was duly judged and condemned, Frederick
would protect him from the possibility of becoming a victim of a crime
such as had been committed in the burning of John Huss. Such
steadfastness on the elector’s part was not easy, for opposition was
mounting, and the number and power of those who declared Luther to be a
heretic were constantly increasing.
    At that point, Maximilian’s death left the imperial throne vacant. Since
this was an elective honor, it was now necessary to settle on a successor to
the dead emperor. The two most powerful candidates were Charles I of
Spain and Francis I of France. The accession of either Charles or Francis to
the imperial throne was feared by Pope Leo, whose policies would be
threatened by the resulting concentration of power in a single person.
Charles already had, besides Spain—rapidly becoming rich through the
gold flowing from its colonial empire—vast hereditary possessions in
Austria, the Low Countries—now the Netherlands, Belgium, and
Luxembord—and southern Italy. Were the imperial crown to be placed on
his brow, his power would be unrivaled in Western Europe. Francis of
France, while not holding as much territory as Charles was also feared by
Leo, for the union of the French and German crowns would place the
papacy once again under the shadow of France. The pope therefore had to
find another candidate worthy of support, not because of his power but by
reason of his personal prestige. Given such criteria, the ideal candidate with
whom the pope could oppose both Charles and Francis was Frederick the
Wise of Saxony, who had earned the respect and admiration of other
German princes. Were Frederick to be elected emperor, the resulting
balance of power would allow Leo greater influence and independence.
Therefore, even before Maximilian’s death, the pope had decided to court
Frederick, and to select him as his candidate for emperor.
    But Frederick protected Luther, at least until the friar was properly tried
and convicted. Therefore, Leo followed a policy of postponing the
condemnation of Luther and seeking better relations both with the Reformer
and with his protector. To seek such rapprochement, he sent Karl von
Miltitz, a relative of Frederick, as his ambassador to Saxony. As a sign of
special papal favor, Miltitz took with him a golden rose for Frederick.
Although the pope refrained from sending a similar gift to Luther, he
instructed his legate to approach the rebellious monk a conciliatory manner.
    Miltitz met with Luther, who promised that he would abstain from
further controversy as long as his opponents did likewise. This brought
about a brief truce, which was broken by John Eck, a professor at the
University of Ingolstadt who was incensed by Luther’s teachings. Eck was
an astute opponent, and therefore instead of attacking Luther, which would
have made him appear to have broken the existing peace, he attacked
Andreas Rudolph Bodenstein von Karlstadt, another professor at
Wittenberg. Karlstadt had been converted to Luther’s position, but he was
an impetuous man who was ready to carry his new beliefs to their radical
conclusions. This in itself made him more vulnerable than Luther to the
charge of heresy, and therefore Eck was well advised to challenge Karlstadt
to a debate. This was to take place in Leipzig, and was originally billed as a
discussion, not of Luther’s theses, but of Karlstadt’s theology. But the
questions posed for debate were clearly those raised by Luther, and
therefore the Reformer declared that this was merely a subterfuge to attack
him, and that he too would participate in the debate.
    The event was conducted with the strict formality of an academic debate
and lasted for several days. When Luther and Eck finally confronted each
other, it was clear that the former had greater knowledge of Scripture,
whereas the latter was more at home in canon law and medieval theology.
Eck very ably maneuvered the discussion into his own field of expertise,
and finally Luther felt compelled to declare that the Council of Constance
had erred in condemning Huss, and that a Christian with the support of
Scripture has more authority than all popes and councils against that
support. That sufficed. Luther had declared himself in agreement with a
heretic who had been condemned by an ecumenical council, and had even
dared accuse the council itself of having erred. In spite of the strength of
Luther’s arguments, which bested Eck at a number of points, it was his rival
who won the debate, for he had proven what he had set out to prove: that
Luther was a heretic and a supporter of the teachings of Huss.
    Thus began a new stage in Luther’s struggle, marked by more open
confrontations and greater dangers. But the Reformer and his followers had
made good use of the time granted to them by political circumstances, with
the result that throughout Germany, and even beyond its borders, there were
increasing numbers who saw in Luther the champion of biblical faith.
Events such as those that took place at the University of Ingolstadt were
repeated throughout Germany. In Ingolstadt, the faculty supported the arrest
and exile of one of its younger members, on the grounds that he held
Lutheran views. Soon there was uproar. Argula von Grumbach, a Bavarian
noblewoman who had been converted to Luther’s views, and the first
woman to publish Protestant treatises, came to the defense of the young
professor in a blistering letter in which she showed herself more adept at
theological debate than the learned faculty at Ingolstadt. In two months,
there were twenty editions of her letter, which became a cause célèbre.
While not always as dramatic, similar events shook practically every part of
Germany.
   To those who found themselves in theological agreement with Luther
was added the support of many humanists and German nationalists. The
former saw many points of contact between Luther’s protest and the
reformation that they proposed. The latter saw in him the mouthpiece of
German outrage in the face of the abuses of Rome.




   The papal bull Exsurge Domine, calling Luther a wild boar and demanding his recantation.
    A few weeks before the Leipzig Debate, Charles I of Spain had been
elected emperor, and was known thereafter as Charles V. Although Charles
owed a debt of gratitude to Frederick the Wise for having supported his
candidacy, he was a strictly orthodox man who would not countenance
heresy in his lands, and therefore his election bode ill for Luther. Frederick
still supported him—the more so since he was becoming increasingly
convinced that the Reformer was right. But now the pope had no reason to
delay a formal condemnation that had earlier been stayed only for political
considerations. In the papal bull Exsurge Domine, in which Leo declared
that a wild boar had entered the Lord’s vineyard, he ordered all books by
Martin Luther to be burned; and he gave the rebellious friar, under the
threat of the penalty of excommunication and the declaration of anathema,
sixty days to submit to Roman authority.
    The bull took a long time to reach Luther. As copies of it arrived in
various German territories, there were conflicting reactions. In some places,
the pope’s instructions were obeyed, and there were public burnings of
Luther’s books. But in other places students and other supporters of Luther
chose to burn the works of his opponents. When the bull finally reached
Luther, he burned it publicly, together with other books that he declared to
be the worst proponents of “popish doctrines.” The breach was final, and
there was no way to undo it.
    It was still necessary to determine the attitude of the emperor and the
other German lords, for without their support there was little that Leo could
do to silence the Reformer. The political maneuvers that took place in this
regard were too complicated to retell here. Let it suffice to say that even
Charles V, a convinced Catholic, showed himself willing to use Luther as a
threat when he feared that Leo was showing too much favor for his rival,
Francis I of France. Eventually, after much back and forth, it was decided
that Luther would appear before the Imperial Diet to be gathered at Worms
in 1521.
    At Worms, Luther was taken before the emperor and several of the great
lords of the German Empire. The man in charge of the process showed him
a number of books, and asked him if he had indeed written them. After
examining them, Luther responded that such was the case, and that he had
also written other books besides these. Then he was asked if he still held to
what he had declared in those publications or wished to recant anything.
This was a difficult moment for Luther, not so much because he feared
imperial power but rather because he feared God. To dare to oppose the
entire church and the emperor, whose authority had been ordained by God,
was a dreadful act. Once again the friar trembled before the divine majesty,
and asked for a day’s time in which to consider his answer.
    By the next day it was widely known that Luther was to appear before
the Diet, and the hall was filled. The emperor’s presence at Worms, with a
corps of Spanish soldiers who showed little respect for Germans, had
irritated the populace as well as many German princes. Once again, Luther
was asked to recant. In the midst of a great hush, the friar answered that
much of what he had written was basic Christian doctrine, held by both him
and his opponents, and that therefore no one should expect him to repudiate
such teaching. At some other points, he continued, his works dealt with the
tyranny and injustice that the German people suffered. This too he could not
recant, for such was not the purpose of the Diet, and in any case to
withdraw such words would result in greater injustice. Third, in his works
there were attacks against certain individuals, and points of doctrine that
were at issue between him and his opponents. Perhaps, he confessed, some
of these things had been said too harshly. But their truth he could not deny,
unless someone could convince him that he was in error.
    It was not the emperor’s purpose to engage in a debate on Luther’s
teaching, and therefore he was asked once again, “Do you recant, or do you
not?” To this Luther responded in German, therefore setting aside the Latin
of traditional theological debate: “My conscience is a prisoner of God’s
Word. I cannot and will not recant, for to disobey one’s conscience is
neither just nor safe. God help me. Amen.”2 Then, with a gesture of victory,
he left the hall and returned to his quarters.
    In burning the papal bull, Luther had challenged Rome. Now, at Worms,
he was challenging the empire. Therefore, he had ample reason to plead:
“God help me!”
                                     3

                   An Uncertain Decade


   Luther is now to be seen as a convicted heretic. He has twenty-one
   days from the fifteenth of April. After that time, no one should give
   him shelter. His followers also are to be condemned, and his books
   will be erased from human memory.


EDICT OF WORMS
                 EXILE, UNREST, AND REBELLION
By burning the papal bull, Luther had challenged the pope’s authority. At
Worms, by refusing to recant, he challenged that of the emperor. The latter
had no intention of allowing a rebellious friar to question his authority, and
therefore was ready to take action against Luther, in spite of the safe-
conduct Frederick the Wise had obtained for the Reformer. But several
powerful members of the Diet opposed such action, and Charles was forced
to negotiate with them. When the Diet finally acquiesced to the emperor’s
wishes by promulgating the edict quoted above, Luther was nowhere to be
found.
   What had happened was that Frederick the Wise, aware the emperor
would demand that the Diet condemn Luther, had taken steps to ensure the
Reformer’s safety. An armed band, following the elector’s instructions, had
abducted Luther and taken him to Wartburg Castle. Based on his own
instructions, Frederick was not informed and thus did not know where
Luther had been hidden. Many thought him dead, and there were rumors
that he had been killed by order of the pope or the emperor.
    Hidden at Wartburg, Luther grew a beard, sent word to some of his
closest friends not to fear for him, and spent his time writing. His most
significant work of this period was the German translation of the Bible. The
translation of the New Testament, begun at Wartburg, was finished two
years later; the Old Testament took ten years to be completed. But that work
was well worth the time spent on it, for Luther’s Bible, besides adding
impetus to the Reformation itself, shaped the German language and national
identity.
    While Luther was in exile, his collaborators in Wittenberg continued the
work of reformation. Foremost among these were Karlstadt (who was
mentioned earlier as a participant at the Leipzig Debate) and Philipp
Melanchthon. The latter was a young professor of Greek whose
temperament differed substantially from Luther’s but who was wholly
convinced of the truth of his older colleague’s teachings. Until then, the
reformation Luther advocated had not been implemented in the religious
life of Wittenberg. Luther’s fear of God and of unwarranted innovation was
such that he had hesitated to take the concrete steps that should follow from
his doctrine. But now, while he was absent, several such steps were taken in
rapid succession. A number of monks and nuns left their monastic
communities and were married. Worship was simplified, and German was
substituted for Latin. Masses for the dead were abolished, as were days of
fasting and abstinence. Melanchthon also began to offer communion in both
kinds—that is, to give the laity the cup as well as the host.
    At first, Luther supported these changes. But soon he began to question
the excesses that were taking place at Wittenberg. When Karlstadt and
several of his followers began tearing down images of saints in churches,
Luther recommended moderation. Then three laymen appeared at
Wittenberg from neighboring Zwickau, declaring themselves prophets.
They claimed that God spoke directly to them, and that they therefore had
no need for Scripture. Melanchthon was at a loss as to how to respond to
such claims, and asked Luther’s advice. Finally, the latter decided that what
was at stake was nothing less than the gospel itself, and that he must return
to Wittenberg. Before taking that step, he notified Frederick the Wise of his
intentions, making it clear that he was returning to Wittenberg counting not
on Frederick’s protection but on God’s.
    Although Luther was not one to take such matters into account when it
was a question of obedience to God, political circumstances favored him,
making it possible for Frederick to keep him hidden at the Wartburg Castle,
and later allowing him to return to Wittenberg without being arrested and
executed. Charles V was determined to stamp out the Lutheran “heresy.”
But he was threatened by more powerful enemies, and could not allow
himself the luxury of alienating those among his German subjects who
supported Luther. Charles’s most constant rival was Francis I of France.
The latter, who in earlier years had been the most influential sovereign in
Europe, was not pleased at the rising star of Charles I of Spain, who now
had become Charles V of the Holy Roman Empire, and who also held vast
hereditary possessions that virtually surrounded France. Shortly before the
Diet of Worms, the two rivals had clashed in Navarre. (As we shall see
later, it was in that conflict that Ignatius Loyola received the wound that
would eventually cause him to become one of the leaders of the Catholic
Reformation.) From the year of the Diet (1521) until 1525, Charles was
repeatedly at war with Francis. Finally, at the Battle of Pavia, the king of
France was captured by imperial troops, and the conflict between the two
most powerful monarchs in Western Europe seemed to have come to an
end.
     Luther at the Diet of Worms. Bas-relief in the monument to the Reformation at Worms.

    Meanwhile, a few months before the Diet of Worms, Leo X had died,
and Charles had used his influence to see that his tutor, Adrian of Utrecht,
was elected pope. The new pope, who took the name of Adrian VI and was
the last non-Italian pope until the twentieth century, was eager to reform the
life of the church, but would brook no deviation from traditional orthodoxy.
He brought austerity of life to Rome, and began a program of reformation
that he hoped would respond to the critics of the church and steal Luther’s
thunder. But Adrian died a year and a half after his election, and his
program was abandoned. His successor, Clement VII, returned to Leo’s
policies, for he too was more interested in the arts and in Italian politics
than in ecclesiastical matters. Soon there was serious friction between him
and the emperor, and this prevented the Catholic party from taking
coordinated action against the German reformers.
    Charles V signed a peace treaty with his prisoner Francis, and on that
basis restored him to freedom and to his throne. But the conditions to which
Francis had been forced to agree were harsh, and once he was back in
France he secured Clement’s support against Charles. The latter was eager
to destroy Lutheranism and to put an end to the Turkish menace at his
Eastern borders. Given the nature of these two causes, he hoped to be able
to count on the support of France and the papacy. But just as he was
preparing his campaign, both Francis and Clement declared war on him.
    In 1527, imperial troops, mostly Spanish and German, invaded Italy and
marched on Rome. The city could not be defended, and the pope fled to the
Castel Sant’Angelo, leaving the city to be sacked by the invaders. Since
many of these were Lutheran, the sack of Rome took on religious
overtones: God was finally punishing the Antichrist. The pope’s situation
was desperate when, early in 1528, a French army, with English financial
support, came to his aid. The imperial troops were forced to withdraw, and
would have suffered great losses had an epidemic not forced the French to
abandon their pursuit. In 1529, Charles agreed to peace, first with the pope,
and then with Francis.
    Charles was once again preparing to take strong measures against the
heretics in his German territories when the Turks, led by Suleiman,
marched on Vienna, the capital of Charles’s Austrian territories. The fall of
Vienna would leave Germany open to Turkish attack, and therefore the
emperor and his German subjects set aside their religious differences and
joined in a campaign against the Turks. The defenders of Vienna were
resolute, and the city stood firm until the advancing German armies forced
Suleiman to withdraw.
    It was then that, after a prolonged absence, Charles returned to Germany,
with the clear intention of stamping out the Lutheran heresy. During the
intervening years, however, several important events had taken place. In
1522 and 1523, there had been a rebellion of knights, under the leadership
of Franz von Sickingen. The knightly class had seen its fortunes declining
for some time and, among the landless and penniless knights, nationalist
feelings ran high. Many blamed Rome for their ill fortune, and saw Luther
as the champion of the German nation. Some, such as Ulrich von Hutten,
were also convinced of the truth of Luther’s religious teachings but felt that
the Reformer was too timid. When they finally rebelled, many claimed that
they were doing so in defense of the Reformation, although Luther had
done nothing to encourage them. The rebels attacked Trier, but were
decisively defeated by the German princes, who took the opportunity to
dispossess the lesser gentry of the few lands that still remained in their
hands. Sickingen died in battle, and von Hutten fled to Switzerland, where
he died shortly thereafter. All this was seen by Luther and his closest
colleagues as a great tragedy, proving once again that one should submit to
the established authorities.
    In 1524, a peasant rebellion broke out. For decades the conditions of the
German peasantry had been worsening. As a result, there had been
rebellions in 1476, 1491, 1498, 1503, and 1514. But none of these was as
widespread or as devastating as the uprisings of 1524 and 1525. One of the
elements making these rebellions particularly virulent was that they took on
religious overtones, for many among the peasantry believed that the
teachings of the reformers supported their economic demands. Although
Luther himself refused to extend the application of his teachings to the
political realm in terms of revolution, there were others who disagreed with
him on that point. Foremost among these was Thomas Müntzer, a native of
Zwickau, whose early teachings were similar to those of the “prophets”
from his village who created such a stir in Wittenberg. Müntzer claimed that
what was most important was not the written word of Scripture but the
present revelation of the Spirit. In his case, such spiritualist doctrine had
political consequences, for he felt that those who had been born again via
the Spirit should join in a theocratic community to bring about the Kingdom
of God. Luther had forced Müntzer out of Saxony, for he feared the
consequences of his teachings. But the fiery preacher returned and joined
the peasant rebellion.
    Even apart from Müntzer’s participation, this uprising had a measure of
religious inspiration. In their Twelve Articles, the peasants made both
economic and religious demands. They sought to base their claims on the
authority of Scripture, and concluded by declaring that, if any of their
demands was shown to be contrary to Scripture, it would be withdrawn.
Therefore, although Luther himself could not see any relationship between
his doctrines and the rebellion, the peasants themselves did see such
relationship.
    In any case, Luther was at a loss as to what his attitude should be.
Possibly his difficulties were related to his doctrine of the two kingdoms
(see Chapter 4). When he first read the Twelve Articles, he addressed the
princes, telling them that what was demanded of them in the articles was
just, for the peasants were sorely oppressed. But when the uprising broke
out, and the peasants took up arms, Luther tried to persuade them to follow
a more peaceful course, and finally called on the princes to suppress the
movement. Later, when the rebellion was drowned in blood, he urged the
victorious princes to be merciful. But his words were not heeded, and it is
said that more than a hundred thousand peasants were killed.
    These events had fateful consequences for the Reformation. Catholic
princes blamed Lutheranism for the rebellion, and from that time even the
most moderate among them took measures against the spread of heresy in
their territories. Vast numbers of peasants, convinced that Luther had
betrayed them, either returned to the old faith or became Anabaptists (see
Chapter 6).
    Although the peasant rebellion occupied much of his time, there was
also turmoil in Luther’s personal life. Even though the law regarded such
actions as crime, when a group of nuns in a nearby convent sent word that
they had been convinced by Luther’s arguments, and sought his help in
escaping from the convent, Luther did arrange for their escape. He then had
to provide for each of them by either finding a position in a household or
arranging for marriage. One of the nuns, Katharina von Bora, proved
reluctant to marry any of her suitors. Several of Luther’s friends suggested
that he ought to marry. Katharina made it clear that there were only two
men she would consider as potential husbands—and one of them was Dr.
Luther. At first Luther joked about it. He was also reluctant to marry
because at that point he believed that it was quite possible that he would
soon have to die as a martyr. But eventually he agreed to marry Katharina.
Although clearly shaped by the patriarchal attitudes of the time, their
marriage was quite happy. There are many hints at humor in their
relationship—she complained that Luther was a slob, and he agreed that he
owed much to “my lord” Katharina. He would also comment at the
strangeness of waking up in the morning to find a pair of pigtails on his
pillow. They had six children, and they worked jointly at providing a home
for them as well as for a number of orphans and students. Luther would say
that his family was like a “small church,” and would rejoice in being part of
it. Out of these experiences, and out of the life of the family, came the
famous Table Talks that his students compiled and published and which are
one of the best avenues for insight into him as a man. His efforts to educate
his children as well as others have been cited as a forerunner of public
education. Furthermore, Luther’s family life became the model that many
devout Germans would follow for generations.




                              Katharina Von Bora
    But while Luther was learning how to be a husband and a father,
Germany was undergoing ever greater turmoil, and Catholic moderates
throughout Europe were forced to choose sides between Luther and his
opponents. The most famous of the humanists, Erasmus, had looked with
favor on the early stages of the Lutheran movement but did not find the
resultant discord much to his liking. He found controversy and dissension
most repugnant, and would have preferred to stay out of the debate. But he
was too famous to be allowed such a luxury and eventually was forced to
take a stand. Although he had frequently criticized the ignorance and
corruption of the clergy, he had never advocated a radical reformation in
theology, and therefore, when forced to speak out, he was bound to take the
side of Luther’s adversaries.
    Still, Erasmus preferred to choose his own field of battle. Therefore,
instead of attacking Luther on such issues as justification by faith, the mass
as a sacrifice, or the authority of the pope, he raised the issue of free will.
Luther had been led to affirm the doctrine of predestination both because it
was a corollary of justification by faith as a free gift of God, and because he
found it amply supported by the authority of Paul and Augustine. It was on
this point that Erasmus attacked him, publishing a treatise on free will.
    Luther responded by thanking Erasmus for having shown the wisdom to
focus his attention on a fundamental issue and not on peripheral matters
such as the sale of indulgences, the relics of the saints, and so on. But then
he went on to defend his position with characteristic vehemence. As he saw
matters, the notion of free will as held by pagan philosophers and by the
moralists of his time did not take into account the enormous power of sin.
Sin is such that we are powerless to be rid of it. Only by divine intervention
can we be justified and freed from the power of evil. And even then we
continue to be sinners. Therefore, when it comes to serving God, our much-
vaunted free will can do nothing of itself. It is only by God’s initiative—by
divine predestination—that we are justified.
    The controversy between Luther and Erasmus led many humanists to
abandon the Lutheran cause. A few, such as Philipp Melanchthon,
continued their staunch support of Luther while maintaining cordial
relations with Erasmus and his friends. But these were by no means the
majority, and therefore the controversy over predestination and free will
marked the end of all hope for close collaboration between Lutherans and
humanists.

                       THE DIETS OF THE EMPIRE
While all this was taking place, and in the emperor’s absence, it was
necessary to govern the empire. Since Charles V had left the country almost
immediately after the Diet of Worms, and since that diet’s edict against
Luther had been the result of imperial pressure, nothing was done to enforce
the decree against the reformer. When the Imperial Diet met again at
Nuremberg, in 1523, it adopted a policy of tolerance toward Lutheranism,
in spite of the protests of the legates of both pope and emperor.
    In 1526, when Charles was engaged in his struggles with Francis I of
France and Pope Clement VII, the Diet of Spire formally withdrew the
Edict of Worms, and granted each of the many German states the freedom
to choose its own religious allegiance. Austria and many of the southern
territories of Germany opted for Catholicism, while others began
implementing the Lutheran Reformation. Germany had thus become a
religious mosaic.
    In 1529, the Second Diet of Spire took a different tack. At that point
there was renewed threat of imperial intervention, and princes who until
then had been fairly moderate joined the ranks of the staunch Catholics. The
result was that the Edict of Worms was reaffirmed. This prompted the
Lutheran princes to present a formal protest, thus receiving the name of
“Protestants.”
    Charles V finally returned to Germany in 1530, in order to attend the
Diet of Augsburg. At Worms, the emperor had refused to listen to Luther’s
arguments. But now, in view of the turn of events, he requested an orderly
exposition of the points at issue. This document, whose main author was
Philipp Melanchthon, is now known as the Augsburg Confession—and for a
long time Lutherans commonly referred to themselves as “Christians of the
Augsburg Confession.” When first drawn, it spoke only for the Protestants
of Saxony. But other princes and leaders also signed it, and thus it was the
instrument whereby most Protestants presented a united front before the
emperor (although there were two other minority statements that disagreed
on several points with Melanchthon’s document). When the signatories of
the Augsburg Confession refused to abandon their faith, the emperor was
enraged and ordered that they must recant by April of the following year, or
suffer the consequences.
    The survival of Protestantism was threatened. If the emperor joined his
hereditary resources from Austria, Spain, and other lands to those of the
Catholic German princes, he would easily crush any Protestant prince who
refused to recant. The Protestant princes decided that their only hope was to
offer a common front. After long hesitation, Luther agreed that it was licit
to take up arms in self-defense against the emperor. The Protestant
territories then joined in the League of Schmalkalden, whose purpose was
to resist the imperial edict if Charles sought to impose it by force of arms.




Emperor Charles V listening to the Augsburg Confession while the rulers who signed it stand around
 him, each identified by his coat of arms. The scenes in the background represent various Lutheran
  services. Note that in Communion the people are receiving both the bread and the wine, and that
                           blood flows from Christ’s side into the chalice.

    Both sides were making ready for long and cruel war when international
events once more forced Charles to postpone action. Francis of France was
again preparing for war, and the Turks were planning to avenge their earlier
failure at the walls of Vienna. To counteract such powerful enemies,
Charles needed a united Germany. These circumstances demanded
negotiation rather than war, and finally Protestants and Catholics agreed to
the Peace of Nuremberg, signed in 1532. This stipulated that Protestants
would be allowed to practice their faith, but could not seek to extend it to
other territories. The imperial Edict of Augsburg was suspended and, in
return, the Protestants offered the emperor their support against the Turks.
They also promised not to go beyond what they had declared to be their
faith in the Augsburg Confession. Once more, political circumstances
favored Protestantism, for it continued advancing into new territories in
spite of the agreement of Nuremberg.
                                     4

                      Luther’s Theology


   The friends of the cross affirm that the cross is good and that works
   are bad, for through the cross works are undone and the old Adam,
   whose strength is in works, is crucified.


MARTIN LUTHER

At this point in the life of Luther, we must pause to consider his theology,
the driving force that would determine much of the rest of his life. By 1521,
when he appeared before the Diet of Worms, Luther had come to the main
theological conclusions that would characterize the whole of his thought.
After that time, he would primarily expand and elaborate on the main points
that had led him to his position at Worms. Therefore, this seems to be the
best point in our narrative at which to pause and discuss the basic themes of
Luther’s theology. Earlier, while telling of his personal quest for salvation,
we spoke of the doctrine of justification by faith. But this was by no means
the totality of Luther’s theology.

                          THE WORD OF GOD
As is commonly known, Luther sought to make the Word of God the
starting point and the final authority for his theology. As a professor of
Scripture, the Bible was for him of paramount importance, and it was in it
that he found an answer to his anguished quest for salvation. But this does
not mean that he was a rigid biblicist, for what he understood the “Word of
God” to be was more than the words written in the Bible.
    In its primary sense, the Word of God is none other than God. This is
supported by the first verses of the Gospel of John, where it is written that
“in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God.” The Bible itself declares that, strictly speaking, the Word of God
is none other than God the Son, the Second Person of the Trinity, the Word
who was made flesh and dwelt among us. Therefore, when God speaks, we
are not simply given information; also, and above all, God acts. This is
what is meant in the book of Genesis, where the Word of God is a creating
force: “God said, let there be . . . and there was.” When God speaks, that
which is uttered is also created. God’s Word, besides telling us something,
creates something in us and in all creation. That creative and powerful
Word is Christ, whose incarnation is both God’s greatest revelation and
God’s greatest action. In Jesus, God was revealed to us. And also in Jesus,
God overcame the powers of evil that had held us in subjection. God’s
revelation is also God’s victory.
    Given this biblical understanding of the Word of God, what makes the
Bible the Word of God is not that it is infallible, nor that it can serve as a
source of authority for theological and religious debate. The Bible is the
Word of God because in it Jesus, the Word incarnate, comes to us. Any who
read the Bible and somehow do not find Jesus in it, have not encountered
the Word of God. This was the reason why Luther, while insisting on the
final authority of Scripture, could make deprecating comments about parts
of it. The Epistle of James, for instance, seemed to him “pure straw,”
because he could not find the gospel in it, but only a series of rules of
conduct. The book of Revelation also caused him difficulty. Although he
was not ready to delete such books from the canon, he openly confessed
that it was difficult for him to see Jesus Christ in them, and that therefore
they were of little value to him.
    This notion of the Word of God as Jesus Christ himself allowed Luther
to respond to one of the main objections Catholics raised to his doctrine of
the authority of Scripture above the church. They argued that, since it was
the church that had determined which books should be included in the
canon of Scripture, it was clear that the church had authority over the Bible.
Luther responded that it was neither the church that had made the Bible, nor
the Bible that had made the church, but the gospel, Jesus Christ, that had
made both the Bible and the church. Final authority rests neither in the
church nor in the Bible, but in the gospel, in the message of Jesus Christ,
who is the Word of God incarnate. Since Scripture gives a more trustworthy
witness to that gospel than the pope’s corrupt church, or even the best in
Christian tradition, the Bible has authority over church, pope, and tradition.
This is so, even though it is also true that in the early centuries of
Christianity it was the church that recognized the gospel in certain books,
and not in others, and thus determined the actual content of the Bible.
  Luther’s Bible was a formative document for German identity, shaping both its religion and its
                                           language.

                     THE THEOLOGY OF THE CROSS
Luther had been formed in the tradition of late medieval theology, which
had profound doubts about the ability of reason to investigate or to prove
matters of faith. Even so, he agreed with most traditional theology that it is
possible to know something about God by purely rational or natural means.
Such knowledge includes the fact that God exists, and allows us to
distinguish between good and evil. The pagan philosophers of antiquity had
this knowledge, and it is clear from the laws of ancient Rome that they were
able to distinguish between good and evil. Furthermore, the philosophers
were able to conclude that there is a single Supreme Being from which all
things draw their existence.
    But all this is not the true knowledge of God. As Luther would say, one
does not get to know God by speculation, like one can get to the roof by
climbing a ladder. All human efforts to climb to heaven, and thus to know
God, are futile. Such efforts are what Luther calls “a theology of glory.”
This theology seeks to know the divine being in itself, in its own glory,
while ignoring the enormous distance between God and humans. In the
final analysis, a theology of glory seeks God in those things that humans
consider most valuable and praiseworthy, and that is why it is so concerned
with the power of God, the glory of God, and the goodness of God. But this
is little more than creating God after our own image, and we deceive
ourselves into believing that God’s nature is what we would like it to be.
    The fact of the matter is that the God of revelation is very different from
the God of a theology of glory. God’s highest self-disclosure takes place in
the cross of Christ, and therefore Luther proposes, instead of a theology of
glory, a “theology of the cross.” Such theology seeks God, not where we
choose, nor as we would like God to be, but in the divine revelation of the
cross. There God is seen in weakness, in suffering, as a stumbling block.
This means that God acts in a radically different way than we would expect.
In the cross, God destroys our preconceived notions of divine glory. When
we know God in the cross, we must set aside our previous knowledge of
God, that is, all that we thought we knew by means of reason or of the inner
voice of conscience. What we now know of God is very different from the
easily assumed knowledge of a theology of glory.

                              LAW AND GOSPEL
It is in the divine revelation that God is truly known. But in that revelation
God is made manifest in two ways: law and gospel. This does not mean
simply that the law is first, and then the gospel. Nor does it mean that the
Old Testament is law, and the New Testament is gospel. This is a
misunderstanding that eventually led many Lutherans to consider Judaism
and Jews as great enemies of the Christian faith, for they supposedly
emphasized law, while Christianity is a matter of grace. It is true that Luther
shared many—though not all—of the prejudices of his time against Jews.
But for Luther, God is revealed in law and gospel in both the Old Testament
and the New. The contrast between law and gospel shows that God’s
revelation is both a word of judgment and a word of grace. The two always
come together, and one cannot hear the word of grace without hearing also
the word of judgment.
    The doctrine of justification by faith, the message of God’s forgiveness,
does not imply that God is indifferent to sin. It is not simply that God
forgives us because after all our sin is not of great consequence. On the
contrary, God is holy, and sin is repugnant to the divine holiness. When God
speaks, we are overwhelmed by the contrast between such holiness and our
own sin. That is what Luther means by the Word of God as law.
    But God also speaks a word of forgiveness—a forgiveness so tied up
with the divine holiness that sometimes the same word is both judgment
and grace. That forgiveness is the gospel, made all the more joyful and
overpowering because the judgment of the law is so crushing. This gospel
does not contradict or obliterate the law. God’s forgiveness does not deny
the gravity of our sin. It is precisely that gravity that makes the gospel such
surprising good news.
    When we hear that word of pardon, however, the character of the law
changes for us. What earlier seemed an unbearable weight now becomes
bearable and even sweet. Commenting on the Gospel of John, Luther
declares:
   At an earlier time there was no pleasure in the law for me. But now I
   find that the law is good and tasty, that it has been given to me so that
   I might live, and now I find my pleasure in it. Earlier, it told me what
   I ought to do. Now I begin to adapt myself to it. And for this I
   worship, praise, and serve God.3

    This constant dialectic between law and gospel means that a Christian is
at one and the same time both sinful and justified—in an oft-quoted phrase:
simul justus et peccator. The sinner does not cease to be such upon being
justified. On the contrary, upon being justified one discovers how deeply
sinful one is. Justification is not the absence of sin but the fact that God
declares us to be just, even while we are still sinners. The indissoluble bond
between gospel and law is paralleled by our own Christian life as both
sinners and justified believers.

                    THE CHURCH AND SACRAMENTS
Contrary to common belief, Luther was neither an individualist nor a
rationalist. During the nineteenth century, when both rationalism and
individualism seemed to be the wave of the future, some historians sought
to depict Luther as the forerunner of such currents. This was frequently tied
to an effort to show that Germany was the mother of modern civilization, of
the use of reason, and of individual freedom. In such interpretations, Luther
became the great national hero of Germany, the founder of modernity.
    But all this is far removed from historical truth. The fact of the matter is
that Luther was far from being a rationalist. His frequent references to
reason as “dirty” or “a whore”—which reflect his upbringing in late
medieval theology—should suffice to prove this point. As to his supposed
individualism, this was more characteristic of the Italian leaders of the
Renaissance than of the German Reformer; and, in any case, Luther
attached too much importance to the church to be classified as a true
individualist.
    In spite of his protest against commonly accepted doctrine, and despite
his rebellion against the authorities of the Roman church, Luther was
convinced that the church was an essential element of the Christian
message. His theology was not that of an individual in direct communion
with God, but rather of a Christian life to be lived within a community of
believers, and this community he frequently called “mother church.”
    While it is true that all Christians, by virtue of their baptism, are priests,
this does not mean—as some later interpreters have said—that one is self-
sufficient to approach God for oneself. There is a direct communion with
God that all Christians can and should enjoy. But there is also an organic
reality within which all communion with God takes place, and that reality is
the church. To be priests does not mean primarily that we are our own
individual priests, but rather that as part of the priestly people of God we
are priests for the entire community of belief, and that they are priests for us
—while all of us, as the believing community, are priests for the world.
Rather than setting aside the need for the community of the church, the
doctrine of the universal priesthood of believers strengthens it. It is true that
access to God is no longer controlled by a hierarchical priesthood. But we
still stand in need of the community of believers, the body of Christ, in
which each member is a priest for the rest, and feeds the rest. Without such
nourishment, an isolated member cannot live.
    In that community, all have a place or a vocation, and all occupations—
as long as they are honest and godly—are equally valuable before the eyes
of God. The monastic life is no holier or worthier than the life of a ruler or
of a cobbler, for all contribute to God’s designs and order. With this
assertion, which is usually called “the sanctity of the common life,” Luther
opened the way for the modern sense of vocation—although, being a man
of his time, he generally felt that each one’s calling was generally
determined by birth. It would be in the next generation, with Calvin and his
contemporaries, that a sense of vocation providing opportunities to move
into new walks of life would come to the foreground.
    Within the life of that church, the Word of God comes to us in the
sacraments. For a rite to be a true sacrament, it must have been instituted by
Christ, and it must be a physical sign of the promise of the gospel. Applying
such criteria, Luther comes to the conclusion that there are only two
sacraments: baptism and communion. Other rites and ceremonies that are
commonly called sacraments, although perhaps beneficial, ought not to be
considered sacraments of the gospel—although for a time Luther did
consider the possibility of declaring penance to also be a sacrament.
    Baptism is first of all a sign of the believer’s death and resurrection with
Jesus Christ. But it is much more than a sign, for by its power we are made
members of the body of Christ. Baptism and faith are closely tied, for the
rite itself without faith is not valid. But this does not mean that one must
have faith before being baptized, or that infants born in the church but as
yet incapable of faith ought not to be baptized. To come to such a
conclusion, Luther declares, would be to fall into the error of believing faith
to be a human work, something we must do, and not a free gift of God. In
salvation, the initiative is always God’s, and this is precisely what the
church proclaims in baptizing infants who are incapable of understanding
what is taking place. Furthermore, baptism is not only the beginning of the
Christian life but also the foundation and the context in which the entire life
of the believer takes place. Baptism is valid, not only when it is received
but throughout life. That is why we are told that Luther himself, when he
felt sorely tried, was wont to exclaim, “I am baptized.” In his own baptism
lay the strength to resist the powers of evil.
    Communion is the other Christian sacrament. Luther rejected a great
deal of commonly accepted doctrine regarding communion. He was
particularly opposed to the celebration of private masses, to the
understanding of communion as a repetition of the sacrifice of Calvary, to
the notion that there are “merits” in simply attending mass, to the doctrine
of transubstantiation, and to the “reservation” of the sacrament—the claim
that the body of Christ remains present in the bread even after the
celebration of communion is over. But, in spite of his opposition to what he
saw as the misuse and misinterpretation of communion, he continued to
attach great importance to the sacrament itself, and to the presence of Christ
in it. While insisting on the need for the preached Word, he retained the
Word made visible in communion as the center of Christian worship.
    The question of the manner in which Christ is present in communion
gave rise to long debates, not only with Catholics, but also among
Protestants. Luther categorically rejected the doctrine of transubstantiation,
which he saw as unduly tied to Aristotelian—and therefore pagan—
metaphysics. Also, the manner in which the doctrine of transubstantiation
had been used had tied it to the theory that the mass was a meritorious
sacrifice, and this ran contrary to justification by faith.
    On the other hand, Luther was not ready to reduce communion to a mere
sign or symbol of spiritual realities. He took Jesus’ words at the institution
of the sacrament as very clear and undeniable proof of his physical presence
at the sacrament: “this is my body.” Therefore, Luther felt compelled to
affirm that in communion one truly and literally partakes of the body of
Christ. This need not imply, as with transubstantiation, that the bread and
wine become body and blood. The bread is still bread, and the wine is still
wine. But now the body and blood of the Lord are also with them, and the
believer is nourished by that body and that blood through the very act of
eating the bread and drinking the wine. Although later interpreters have
commonly used the term consubstantiation to describe Luther’s doctrine of
the presence of Christ in communion in contrast to Roman Catholic
transubstantiation, Luther never used such metaphysical terms, but would
speak of the presence of the body of Christ in, with, under, around, and
behind the bread and wine.
    Not all who opposed traditional doctrine agreed with Luther on these
points, and this soon gave rise to conflicts among leaders of the
Reformation. Karlstadt, Luther’s colleague at the University of Wittenberg
who debated Eck at Leipzig, claimed that the presence of Christ in
communion was merely symbolic, and that when Jesus said “this is my
body” he was pointing to himself and not the bread. Ulrich Zwingli (who is
discussed in Chapter 5) held similar views although with better arguments.
As we shall see, when they met at Marburg in 1529, this was the one point
on which they could not agree. Eventually, the question of how Christ is
present in communion became one of the main points at issue in the debates
between Lutherans and Reformed.

                          THE TWO KINGDOMS
Before concluding this brief overview of Luther’s theology, a word must be
said regarding the relationship between church and state. According to
Luther, God has established two kingdoms: one under the law, and the other
under the gospel. The state must operate under the law, and its main
purpose is to set limits to human sin and its consequences. Without the
state, sin would lead to chaos and destruction. Believers, on the other hand,
belong to the other kingdom, which is under the gospel. This means that
Christians ought not to expect the state to be ruled by the gospel, nor to
support orthodoxy by persecuting heretics. Furthermore, there is no reason
why Christians should require that the state be ruled by fellow believers in
order to obey them. Rulers, as such, must follow the law, and not the
gospel. In the kingdom of the gospel, civil authorities have no power. In
that which refers to this second kingdom, Christians are not subject to the
state, and owe it no allegiance. But one must always remember that
believers are at once justified and sinners; therefore, as people who are still
sinners, we are under the authority of the state.
    In concrete terms, this meant that true faith should not seek to impose
itself by means of civil authority, but only through the power of the Word.
In the complex realities of power and politics, however, such principles
were difficult to follow. Luther repeatedly rejected offers of help from the
princes who had embraced his cause, and yet found himself being helped by
them. When those who had embraced the Reformation were threatened by
Catholic armies, Luther hesitated on a proper response, but eventually
agreed with the Lutheran princes that they were justified in going to war in
self-defense. Similarly, in the case of the peasants’ revolt, Luther held that
the peasants were being treated unjustly, but that as Christians they still had
no right to revolt. Over the centuries, Luther’s understanding of the
relationship between the church and the civil order has repeatedly affected
the manner in which his followers have dealt with oppressive or unjust
governments, which has not been as radical as has been the case with those
of the Reformed (or Calvinist) tradition.
 This Lutheran caricature shows the bitterness of the struggle between Catholics and Protestants.
   Note the pope sitting on his throne at the very mouth of Hades, and the devils crowning him.

   Luther was not a pacifist. Being subject to the law, the state can take up
arms when circumstances and justice so demand. When the Turks
threatened to overrun Christendom, Luther advised his followers to take up
arms. And when he became convinced that certain movements, such as the
peasant uprisings and Anabaptism (see Chapter 6), were subversive, he
declared that civil authorities were under obligation to crush them. He had
serious doubts regarding the traditional understanding of the relationship
between church and state. But his own doctrine of the two kingdoms, on
which he sought to base his actions in the political arena, was difficult to
apply to concrete situations.
                                     5

Ulrich Zwingli and the Swiss Reformation


   If the inner man is such that he finds his delight in the law of God
   because he has been created in the divine image in order to have
   communion with Him, it follows that there will be no law or word
   which will delight that inner man more than the Word of God.


ULRICH ZWINGLI

Humanism     and nationalism, both contributing factors to the Lutheran
Reformation even against Luther’s intentions, became conscious elements
of the reformation Zwingli led in Switzerland.

                       ZWINGLI’S PILGRIMAGE
Ulrich Zwingli was born in a small Swiss village in January 1484, less than
two months after Luther. After learning his first letters from an uncle, he
studied in Basel and Bern, where humanism was thriving. He then went to
the University of Vienna, and again studied in Basel. After receiving a
Master of Arts degree in 1506, he became a priest in the Swiss village of
Glarus. There he continued his humanistic studies, and became proficient in
Greek. This combination of priestly duties with humanistic studies was
exceptional, for records show that many parish priests in Switzerland at that
time were ignorant, and that some had never even read the entire New
Testament. In contrast, when Erasmus published his Greek New Testament,
Zwingli made a copy of it which he carried with him in order to memorize
as much of it as possible.
    Zwingli was not only a pastor and a scholar, but also a patriot. At that
time large contingents of Swiss mercenaries were being hired by various
warring factions, to the point that this had become an important source of
income for the Swiss cantons. In 1512, and again in 1515, Zwingli went on
Italian campaigns with mercenary soldiers from his district. The first
expedition was successful, and the young priest saw his parishioners
brutally looting the conquered region. The outcome of the second was the
opposite, and he now had occasion to see the impact of war on the defeated.
This convinced him that one of the great evils of Switzerland was that
mercenary service destroyed the moral fiber of society—or, as he would
say, that the Swiss were selling blood for gold.




                       Europe at the Time of the Reformation.
   After spending ten years at Glarus, Zwingli was made a priest of an
abbey to which many went on pilgrimage. He soon drew attention to
himself by preaching against the notion that exercises such as pilgrimages
could avail for salvation, and declaring that he found nothing in the New
Testament in support of such practices. His fame grew to the point that in
1518 he was transferred to Zürich. By that time he had reached conclusions
similar to those of Luther. His route to such conclusions had not been the
anguished quest of the German Reformer, but rather the study of Scripture
according to the method of the humanists, and his zealous outrage against
the superstition that passed for Christianity, against the exploitation of the
people by some leaders of the church, and against mercenary service.




Ulrich Zwingli, the reformer of Zurich, reached his theological conclusions quite independently from
                              Luther, and by an entirely different route.

   Zwingli’s preaching, devotion, and learning soon won him the respect of
his parishioners in Zürich. In 1519, the city suffered a plague that killed
over a quarter of the population, and infected Zwingli as he tended to his
flock; he barely survived. When a seller of indulgences arrived, Zwingli
convinced the government that he should be expelled from the city before
he could peddle his wares.
   Then Francis I of France, who was at war with Charles V, requested
mercenary contingents from the Swiss Confederation, and all cantons sent
their soldiers—except Zürich. The pope, an ally of Francis, insisted that
Zürich had an obligation to the papacy, and prevailed on the government to
send mercenary soldiers to serve under Francis. That incident directed
Zwingli’s attention to the abuses of the papacy, and his attacks against
superstition and the unjust use of power became more sharply focused on
the papacy.
   This was the time when Luther was creating a stir in Germany, daring to
oppose the emperor’s will at the Diet of Worms. Now Zwingli’s enemies
spread the word that his teachings were the same as those of the German
heretic. Later, Zwingli would declare that, even before having heard of
Luther’s teachings, he had come to similar conclusions through his study of
the Bible. Thus, Zwingli’s reformation was not a direct result of Luther’s;
rather, it was a parallel movement that soon established links with its
counterpart in Germany. In any case, by 1522, the year after the Diet of
Worms, Zwingli was ready to undertake the great task of reformation, and
the Council of Government of Zürich was ready to support him in this
endeavor.

                        THE BREAK WITH ROME
Zürich was under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the bishop of Constance,
who expressed concern over what was taking place in Zürich. In 1522,
when Zwingli preached against the laws of fasting and abstinence, and
some of his parishioners gathered to eat sausages during Lent, the suffragan
bishop of Constance accused the preacher before the Council of
Government. But Zwingli defended his preaching on the basis of Scripture,
and he was allowed to continue preaching. Shortly thereafter he expanded
the scope of his attacks on traditional Christianity by declaring that priestly
celibacy was not biblical, and further declaring that those who commanded
it did not follow their own injunctions. He and ten other priests had written
to the pope requesting permission to marry. When his petition was denied,
he secretly married the widow Anna Reinhart, who would be a faithful
companion and supporter the rest of his life. Pope Adrian VI, who was
aware of the need to reform the church but was not willing to go as far as
Luther and Zwingli demanded, made him tempting offers. But Zwingli
refused, insisting on the scriptural base for the reforms he advocated. This
led the Council of Government to call for a debate between Zwingli and a
representative of the bishop.
    At the appointed time, several hundred spectators gathered. Zwingli
expounded on several theses, and defended them on the basis of Scripture.
The bishop’s representative refused to respond to him, declaring that a
general council would gather soon, and at that time, all the matters currently
being debated would be settled. When he was asked to try to show that
Zwingli was wrong, he again refused to do so. Therefore, the council
decided that, since no one had refuted Zwingli’s teachings, he was free to
continue preaching. This decision marked Zürich’s final break with the
bishopric of Constance, and therefore with Rome.
    From that point on, Zürich’s reformation marched apace, with the
support of the Council of Government. Zwingli’s main goal was to restore
biblical faith and practice. But in the exact content of this program he
differed from Luther, for while the German was willing to retain all
traditional uses that did not contradict the Bible, the Swiss insisted that all
that had no explicit scriptural support must be rejected. This led him, for
instance, to suppress the use of organs in church, for such instruments—as
well as the violin, which he played expertly—were not found in the Bible.
But he also banned music and other practices that do appear in the Bible, on
the grounds that nothing should be allowed to lead the mind away from the
central task of hearing the Word of God. Even communion should not be
celebrated too frequently, for it could detract from the Word, and therefore
Zwingli preferred that it be celebrated only four times a year, and that
people remain seated as they partook.
    Rapid changes took place in Zürich under Zwingli’s direction.
Communion in both kinds—the bread and the cup—was offered to the laity.
Many priests, former monks, and nuns were married. General public
education, with no class distinctions, became the norm. And many took it
upon themselves to spread Zwingli’s ideas to other Swiss cantons.
    The Swiss Confederation was not a centralized state, but rather a
complex mosaic of different states, each with its own laws and government,
that had come together in order to achieve a number of common goals,
particularly independence from the German Empire. Within that mosaic,
some cantons became Protestant, while others continued in their obedience
to Rome and its hierarchy. Religious disagreement, added to other causes of
friction, made civil war seem inevitable.
    The Catholic cantons took steps to seek an alliance with Charles V, and
Zwingli recommended that the Protestant cantons take the military initiative
before it was too late. But authorities in the Protestant areas were not
willing to be the first to resort to arms. When Zürich finally decided that it
was time to go to war, the other Protestant cantons disagreed. Against
Zwingli’s advice, economic measures were taken against the Catholic
cantons, which the Swiss Protestants accused of treason for having joined
the cause of Charles V, of the hated house of Hapsburg.
    In October of 1531, the five Catholic cantons joined in a surprise attack
on Zürich. The defenders hardly had time to prepare for combat, for they
did not know that they were at war until they saw the enemy’s banners.
Zwingli marched out with the first soldiers, hoping to resist long enough to
allow the rest of the army to organize to defend the city. In Kappel, the
Catholic cantons defeated the army of Zürich, and Zwingli was killed after
the battle by a mercenary captain who found him among the wounded. His
body was then quartered and burned, amidst much rejoicing by the victors.
    The First Peace of Kappel was signed a little more than a month later.
The Protestants agreed to cover the expenses of the recent military actions
and, in return, each canton would have the freedom to make its own choice
in matters of religion. From that time, Protestantism was firmly established
in several Swiss cantons, while others remained Catholic. The movement of
population from one canton to another, seeking freedom for the practice of
religion, soon made some cantons staunchly Protestant, and others Catholic.
In Zürich itself, Zwingli’s mantle fell to Heinrich Bullinger, a disciple and
companion of Zwingli who would continue providing leadership for almost
another half century, until his own death in 1575.

                        ZWINGLI’S THEOLOGY
Since Zwingli’s theology coincided with Luther’s on many points, it shall
suffice here to show the main points of contrast between the two reformers.
The main difference between them resulted from the paths that each
followed. While Luther’s was that of a tormented soul that finally found
solace in the biblical message of justification by faith, Zwingli’s was that of
the humanist who studied Scripture because it was the source of Christian
faith, and humanism encouraged such return to the sources. This in turn
meant that Zwingli had a more positive view of the power of reason than
did Luther.




   Finding himself in agreement with Luther on many points, Zwingli studied the writings of the
   German reformer. The marginal notes on this copy of one of Luther’s works are in Zwingli’s
                                         handwriting.

   A good example of this difference is the manner in which each dealt
with the doctrine of predestination. They agreed that predestination was
scriptural, and that it was necessary to affirm it as the basis for the doctrine
of justification by grace alone. For Luther, the doctrine of predestination
was the expression and the result of his experience of knowing himself
powerless before his own sin, and therefore finding himself forced to
declare that his salvation was not his own work, but God’s. In contrast,
Zwingli saw predestination as the logical consequence of the nature of God.
For the Swiss reformer, the main argument in favor of predestination was
that, since God is both omnipotent and omniscient, God knows and
determines all things beforehand. Luther would not employ such arguments,
but would be content with declaring that predestination is necessary
because human beings are incapable a doing anything for their own
salvation. He would probably have rejected Zwingli’s arguments as the
result of reason, and not of biblical revelation nor of the experience of the
gospel.
    Zwingli’s view of original Christianity had been colored by a particular
tradition of whose influence he was not fully aware: the long history of a
Neoplatonic interpretation of Christianity that had made its way into
Christian theology through the influence of Justin, Origen, Augustine,
Dionysius the Areopagite, and others. One element in that tradition is a
tendency to undervalue matter, and to contrast it with spiritual reality. This
was one of the reasons why Zwingli insisted on a simple form of worship,
one that would not lead the believer to the material through excessive use of
the senses. Luther, on the other hand, saw the material, not as an obstacle,
but as an aid to spiritual life.
    The consequences of these diverging views were evident in the two
reformers’ understanding of sacraments, particularly the eucharist. While
Luther held that an inner divine action took place when the outer human
action was performed, Zwingli refused to grant such efficacy to the
sacraments, for this would limit the freedom of the Spirit. For him, the
material elements, and the physical actions that accompany them, can be no
more than signs or symbols of spiritual reality. In the case of communion,
Zwingli held that the presence of Christ in the elements is symbolic, and
that the effectiveness of the sacrament is in the faith of those who partake of
it. Baptism, however, presented greater difficulties. Zwingli was not willing
to abandon infant baptism—an action that would have undermined his view
that church and state are coextensive. But, if the efficacy of the sacrament is
merely symbolic, why perform it on those who cannot perceive the symbol?
It was this inner tension in Zwingli’s theology that would be laid bare in
Zürich by the first Anabaptists (see Chapter 6).
    Their diverging views on the sacraments were important for both
Zwingli and Luther, for they were part and parcel of the rest of their
theology. Therefore, when political circumstances led Landgrave Philip of
Hesse to try to bring together the German and Swiss reformers, the question
of how Christ is present at communion proved to be an insurmountable
obstacle. This took place in 1529, when under the bidding of Philip the
main leaders of the reformation gathered at Marburg: Luther and
Melanchthon from Wittenberg, Bucer from Strasbourg, Oecolampadius
from Basel, and Zwingli from Zürich. On fourteen out of fifteen issues
there was agreement, but not on the meaning and efficacy of communion.
Perhaps even there an agreement could have been reached, had
Melanchthon not reminded Luther that a compromise with Zwingli on this
point would further alienate Catholic Germans whom Luther and his
companions still hoped to win for their cause. Some time later, when the
break with Catholics was clearly irreversible, Melanchthon himself reached
an agreement with the reformers from Switzerland and Strasbourg.
    In any case, there is no doubt that the phrase attributed to Luther at the
Colloquy of Marburg, “we are not of the same spirit,” correctly summarizes
the situation. Their differences regarding communion were not an
unimportant detail in the whole of their theologies, but were rather the
result of their divergent views on the relation between matter and spirit, and
therefore on the nature of God’s revelation.
    These and other differences between Luther and Zwingli would give rise
to two Protestant traditions, the Lutheran and the Reformed, that would
differ particularly on the matter of the Lord’s presence in the eucharist.
While eventually the Reformed tradition would claim Calvin as its
foundational theologian, there would still be much in it that bore Zwingli’s
imprint. On the matter of the eucharist, many Reformed would hold to
Zwingli’s views rather than to Calvin’s (see Chapter 7). And the many cases
in which the Reformed have taken up armed rebellion as a matter of
righteousness and justice—for instance, in the Netherlands, Scotland,
England, and the United States—have echoed Zwingli’s preaching and
attitudes as both a reformer and a patriot.
                                      6

                The Radical Reformation


   Now everybody hopes to be saved by a superficial faith, without the
   fruits of faith, without the baptism of trial and tribulation, without
   love or hope, and without truly Christian practice.


CONRAD GREBEL

Both Luther and Zwingli were convinced that over the course of centuries
Christianity had ceased to be what it was in the New Testament. Luther
sought to cleanse it from all that contradicted Scripture. Zwingli went
further, holding that only that which had a scriptural foundation should be
believed and practiced. But soon there were others who pointed out that
Zwingli did not carry such ideas to their logical conclusion.

                       THE FIRST ANABAPTISTS
According to these critics, Zwingli and Luther forgot that in the New
Testament there is a marked contrast between the church and the society
surrounding it. The result was persecution, since Roman society could not
tolerate primitive Christianity. Therefore, the compromise between church
and state that took place as a result of Constantine’s conversion was in itself
a betrayal of primitive Christianity. In order to be truly obedient to
Scripture, the reformation begun by Luther must go much further than was
allowed by the Reformer. The church must not be confused with the rest of
society. The essential difference between the two is that, while one becomes
a member of a society merely by being born into it, and through no decision
on one’s own part, one cannot belong to the true church without a personal
decision to that effect. In consequence, infant baptism must be rejected, for
it takes for granted that one becomes a Christian by being born into a
supposedly Christian society. This obscures the need for a personal decision
that stands at the very heart of the Christian faith. The resultant community
of faith is then responsible for disciplining its own members, whose purity
of life must be a witness to the gospel—a purity that cannot be guaranteed
nor enforced by the civil government. This was the one point at which some
of the more moderate reformers sought to follow the Anabaptist lead, for
first Martin Bucer in Strasbourg and then John Calvin in Geneva insisted on
the right and obligation of the church to discipline its members, and not
leave such matters to the state.
    Most of these radical reformers also held that pacifism is an essential
element in Christianity. The Sermon on the Mount must be obeyed literally,
and any who object saying that this is impossible simply show their lack of
faith. Christians ought not to take up arms to defend themselves, nor to
defend their country, even if the Turks threaten it. As was to be expected,
such teachings were not well received in Austria and Germany, where the
Turks were a constant threat, nor in Zürich and the other Protestant areas of
Switzerland, where there was always the danger that Protestantism would
be crushed by Catholic armies.
    These ideas circulated in various seemingly disconnected parts of
Europe, including some Catholic countries. But it was in Zürich that they
first received public attention. In that city, there was a group of believers
who urged Zwingli to undertake a more radical reformation. These people,
who called themselves the brethren, insisted on the need to found a
congregation of true believers, in contrast with the multitudes who called
themselves Christian simply because they had been born in a Christian
country and had been baptized as infants.
    When it finally became apparent that Zwingli would not follow that
course of action, some of the “brethren” decided that it was time to found
such a congregation. George Blaurock, a former priest, asked another of the
brethren, Conrad Grebel, to baptize him. On January 21, 1525, at the
fountain that stood in the city square in Zürich, Grebel baptized Blaurock,
who then did the same for several others. At that time they did not baptize
by immersion, for their main concern was not the manner in which the rite
was administered but rather the need for faith before receiving baptism.
Later, as they sought to conform to the New Testament, they began
baptizing by immersion.
    Their enemies soon began calling them anabaptists, which means
rebaptizers. Such a name was not quite accurate, for the supposed
rebaptizers did not hold that one should be rebaptized, but rather that infant
baptism was not valid, and therefore the first real baptism takes place when
one receives the rite after having made a public confession of faith. In any
case, history knows them as Anabaptists, a title which has lost its earlier
pejorative connotation.
    The Anabaptist movement drew great opposition from Catholics as well
as from other Protestants. Although that opposition was usually couched in
theological considerations, in fact Anabaptists were persecuted because
they were considered subversive. In spite of their radical views on other
matters, both Luther and Zwingli accepted the notion that church and state
must live side by side, supporting each other, and both refrained from any
interpretation of the gospel that would make it a threat to the established
social order. The Anabaptists, without seeking to do so, did threaten the
social order. Their extreme pacifism was unacceptable to those in charge of
maintaining social and political order, particularly amidst the upheavals of
the sixteenth century.
    Also, by insisting on emphasizing the contrast between the church and
civil society, the Anabaptists implied that the power structures within civil
society should not be adopted by the church. Even though Luther’s original
goals did not intend it, Lutheranism was now supported by the princes who
had embraced it, and such princes enjoyed great authority in matters both
civil and ecclesiastic. In Zwingli’s Zürich, the Council of Government had
the final word in religious matters. And the same was true in Catholic lands,
where medieval traditions prevailed. This certainly did not preclude
repeated clashes between church and state. But there was at least a body of
common presuppositions that provided the framework for the solution of
such conflicts. All this the Anabaptists undid with their insistence on the
church as a voluntary community, totally distinct from the civil community.
Furthermore, many Anabaptists were radical egalitarians. In most of their
groups, women had the same rights as men; and, at least in theory, the poor
and the ignorant were as important as the rich and the learned.
    In this, the Anabaptist movement proved to be a significant forerunner
of the modern spirit of religious tolerance. Because the church was not
coextensive with the state, the latter had no authority to determine the
religion of its subjects. On rare occasions (when they took possession of the
city of Münster, for example), some of the more extreme Anabaptists
abandoned this principle, but most Anabaptists would hold to it, and would
thus leave a significant though indirect imprint on modernity.
    It was partly as an attempt to curb extremism among their ranks that a
number of Anabaptist leaders met in Schleitheim, Switzerland, in 1527—
barely two years after the beginning of the movement—and issued the
Confession of Schleitheim, a brief document that expounded on the seven
fundamental practices and principles held by most Anabaptists. The first
such principle was that baptism should only be administered to those who
have repented and amended their lives, and who believed in Christ. Over
against this, infant baptism is the worst of all the “abominations of the
Pope.” The second principle had to do with discipline, or the “ban,” which
was to be applied to those who refuse to amend their lives after two private
and one public admonitions, who should then be banned from the
communion table. The third is that communion—which is done in
remembrance of the broken body and the shed blood of Christ—was not to
be offered to those who were not baptized—as adults—for in communion
all true believers are made into one bread. Fourth, true believers must
separate themselves from all that is not united with God and Christ, for all
of it is abomination. Indeed, all creatures are either good or bad, and
believers must shun the latter. The fifth outlines the duties of pastors.
Finally, the sixth and seventh principles of the Confession of Schleitheim
rejects the use of “the sword”—meaning all forms of war or violence—as
well as the giving of oaths, and spells out that this means that true believers
must not participate in any activity connected with either the sword or oaths
—meaning war, civil service, oaths to rulers or magistrates, and so on.
    All this appeared highly subversive, and therefore Anabaptists had to
face severe persecution. This was one of the reasons why the Confession of
Schleitheim was issued. In 1525, two years before the Confession, the
Catholic areas of Switzerland began condemning them to death. The
following year, the Council of Government of Zürich followed suit. In a
few months, persecution spread to the rest of Switzerland. In Germany there
was no uniform policy, for each state followed its own course, generally
applying to Anabaptists various ancient laws against heretics. In 1528,
Charles V ordered that they be put to death on the basis of an ancient
Roman law, directed against the Donatists, that established the death
penalty for all guilty of rebaptizing. The Diet of Spire of 1529—the same in
which the Lutheran princes protested and were first called Protestants—
approved the imperial decree against Anabaptists. The only German prince
who followed his conscience and refused to apply the edict was Philip I,
Landgrave of Hesse. In some areas, including Luther’s Electoral Saxony,
Anabaptists were accused both of heresy and of sedition. Since one was a
religious offense, and the other a crime, both ecclesiastical and civil courts
had jurisdiction over those accused of being Anabaptist.
    The martyrs were many—probably more than those who died during the
three centuries of persecution preceding Constantine. The manner of their
death varied from region to region, and even from case to case. With ironic
cruelty, many were drowned. Others were burned to death, as had become
customary with heretics centuries earlier. Some were tortured to death, or
drawn and quartered. The stories of heroism in such difficult circumstances
would fill several volumes. And still, the more fiercely it was persecuted,
the more the movement grew.
 With cruel irony, many Anabaptists were drowned. The drowning of Maria von Monjon, in 1552, is
                           the subject of this engraving by Jan Luiken.

                THE REVOLUTIONARY ANABAPTISTS
Many of the first leaders of the movement were scholars, and almost all
were pacifists. But soon that first generation succumbed to persecution. The
movement then became increasingly radical, and became an expression of
the popular resentment that had earlier resulted in peasant rebellions. The
original pacifism was then forgotten, and hopes of violent revolution took
its place.
    Even before the heyday of Anabaptism, Thomas Müntzer had brought
together some of its tenets with the peasants’ hopes for social justice. He
joined the revolt, and as a result was executed in 1525, just over four
months after the first Anabaptist baptisms in Zürich. Now many
Anabaptists did likewise. One of them was Melchior Hoffman, a leather-
dresser who had been first a Lutheran and then a Zwinglian before
becoming an Anabaptist. In Strasbourg, where a measure of tolerance had
allowed Anabaptism to become relatively strong, Hoffman began
announcing that the Day of the Lord was near. His preaching inflamed the
multitudes, which flocked to Strasbourg in the hope that the New Jerusalem
would become a reality there. Hoffman himself announced that he would be
imprisoned for six months, and that then the end would come. He also
rejected the initial Anabaptist pacifism on the grounds that, as the end
approached, it would become necessary for the children of God to take up
arms against the children of darkness. When he was imprisoned, thus
fulfilling the first half of his prediction, even more people went to
Strasbourg, there to await a sign from heaven that the time had come to take
up arms. But the growing number of Anabaptists in the city provoked
authorities to take repressive measures, and in any case Hoffman was still in
prison after the predicted day of the Second Coming.
    Then someone suggested that the New Jerusalem would not be
established in Strasbourg but rather in Münster. In that city, the existing
balance of power between Catholics and Protestants had forced a measure
of tolerance, and therefore Anabaptists were not persecuted. The visionaries
went there, as did many others whom intolerable oppression had led to
despair. The Kingdom would come soon. It would come in Münster. And
then the poor would receive the earth as their inheritance.
    Soon the number of Anabaptists in Münster was such that they took over
the city. Their leaders were John Matthys, a Dutch baker, and his main
disciple, John of Leiden. Abandoning the Anabaptist principle of religious
tolerance, one of their first acts was to expel the Catholics from the city.
The bishop, forced to leave his see, gathered an army and laid siege to the
New Jerusalem. Meanwhile, inside the city, there was a growing insistence
that everything must conform to the Bible. Moderate Protestants were also
expelled. Sculptures, paintings, and all sorts of items connected with
traditional belief and worship were destroyed. Outside the city, the bishop
killed every Anabaptist who fell into his hands. The defenders, seeing their
situation worsen daily as food became increasingly scarce, became more
emotional. There were daily claims of visions and revelations. In a military
sortie against the bishop, John Matthys was killed, and John of Leiden
became the leader of the besieged city. As a result of the prolonged war, and
of the constant exodus of males, there were now many more women than
men. As a remedy, John of Leiden decreed the practice of polygamy,
following the example of the patriarchs of the Old Testament.
    Although the besieged suffered increasing deprivation, the bishop lacked
the funds to keep an army in the field. John of Leiden then led his followers
in what seemed a successful sortie, and they in response proclaimed him
king of the New Jerusalem. But shortly after these events some of the
inhabitants of the city, tired of the excesses of the visionaries, opened the
gates to the bishop. The king of the New Jerusalem was captured and
exhibited throughout the area, jointly with his two principal lieutenants.
Then they were tortured and executed. Thus ended the primary outburst of
revolutionary Anabaptism. Melchior Hoffman, forgotten by most, continued
to serve his sentence in prison, very likely until his death. For generations,
in the Church of St. Lambert in Münster, visitors could see the three cages
in which the king of the New Jerusalem and his two aides had been
exhibited.

                    THE LATER ANABAPTISTS
The fall of Münster put an end to revolutionary Anabaptism. Soon the
explanation given for the tragedy of Münster was the abandonment of
pacifism. Like the first Anabaptists, the new leaders of the movement held
that the reason why Christians are not willing to follow the precepts of the
Sermon on the Mount is not that such precepts are impossible to obey but
rather that they require great faith. Those who possess such faith will
practice the love that Jesus taught, leaving the consequences in God’s
hands.
    The principal figure in this new generation was Menno Simons, a Dutch
Catholic priest who was led to reconsider the matter of infant baptism by
the martyrdom of an Anabaptist in 1531. Five years later, in 1536—the
same year that John of Leiden and his cohorts were executed—Menno left
his position as a parish priest and embraced Anabaptism. He joined a Dutch
Anabaptist fellowship, and eventually his followers came to be called
Mennonites. Although the Mennonites suffered the same persecution as
other Anabaptists, Menno Simons survived, and spent years traveling
through Holland and northern Germany preaching his faith and encouraging
his followers. He also wrote a vast number of treatises, of which
Foundations of the Christian Doctrine, published in 1539, became the most
influential. He was convinced that pacifism was an essential part of true
Christianity, and therefore refused to have anything to do with the
revolutionary Anabaptists. He also felt that Christians ought not to offer any
oaths whatsoever, and that they should not occupy positions requiring them.
But they should obey civil authorities, as long as what is required of them is
not contrary to Scripture. Baptism—which he performed by pouring water
over the head—should be administered only to adults who confess their
faith publicly. Neither that rite nor communion confer grace, but rather are
outward signs of what takes place inwardly between God and the believer.
Finally, following Jesus’ example, Menno and his followers practiced
footwashing.
 Menno Simons, who became an Anabaptist in 1536, was soon one of the movement’s most famous
          leaders. His staunch pacifism was characteristic of most later Anabaptists.

   In spite of their refusal to participate in subversive acts, Mennonites
were considered subversive by many governments because they would not
take oaths or offer military service. For this reason they were scattered
throughout Eastern Europe, particularly Russia. Later, others left for North
America, where they were offered religious tolerance. But in both Russia
and North America they encountered difficulties, for in both cases the state
required that they serve in the armed forces—a requirement later waived in
the Unites States and other countries. Thus, in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries many Mennonites immigrated to South America, where there
were still territories where they could live in relative isolation from the rest
of society. By the twentieth century, Mennonites were the main branch of
the old Anabaptist movement of the sixteenth century, and they still insisted
on their pacifist stance. But persecution appeared to be chiefly a matter of
the past, and Mennonites had gained an honored place in society through
their social service.
                                      7

                            John Calvin


   Let us beware lest our words and thoughts go beyond what the Word
   of God tells us. . . . We must leave to God His own knowledge, . . .
   and conceive Him as He makes Himself known to us, without
   attempting to discover anything about His nature apart from His
   Word.


JOHN CALVIN

Without     any doubt, the most important systematizer of Protestant
theology in the sixteenth century was John Calvin. While Luther was the
daring trailblazer of the movement, Calvin was the careful thinker who
bound the various Protestant doctrines into a cohesive whole. Also, Luther’s
tortured quest for salvation and his joyous discovery of justification by faith
were such that they always dominated his theology. Calvin, as a theologian
of the second generation, did not allow the doctrine of justification to
eclipse the rest of Christian theology, and therefore was able to pay more
attention to several aspects of Christian faith which Luther had virtually
ignored—in particular, the doctrine of sanctification.

                      CALVIN’S EARLY CAREER
Calvin was born in the small town of Noyon, in France, on July 10, 1509.
By that time, Luther had delivered his first lectures at the University of
Wittenberg. Calvin’s father was part of the rising middle class of Noyon,
and served as secretary to the bishop and procurator of the cathedral
chapter. Through such connections, he obtained for young John the income
from two minor ecclesiastical posts, to defray his expenses as a student.
    Making use of such resources, and hoping for an ecclesiastical career,
young Calvin studied in Paris, where he became acquainted with humanism
as well as with the conservative reaction against it. The theological
discussion that was then taking place made him familiar with the doctrines
of Wycliffe, Huss, and Luther. But, as he later declared, “I was stubbornly
tied to the superstitions of the papacy.”3 In 1528, he received the degree of
Master of Arts. His father, who apparently had fallen out with the bishop
and lost his influence in Noyon, then decided that his son should abandon
theology and pursue a career in law. With that end in mind, Calvin studied
in Orleans and Bourges, under two of the most famous jurists of the time,
Pierre de l’Estoile and Andrea Alciati. The former followed the traditional
methods for the study and interpretation of law, whereas the latter was an
elegant humanist with a reputation for being somewhat pompous. When
controversy arose between the two, Calvin took the side of de l’Estoile.
This serves as an indication that, at the very time he was most profoundly
imbued in the spirit of humanism, Calvin felt no admiration for the vacuous
elegance that characterized some of the most famous humanists.

                            THE INSTITUTES
When his father died, Calvin returned to Paris to finish his interrupted
studies in theology, and eventually to join the Protestant cause. How Calvin
arrived at his break with Rome, or the exact date this took place, is not
known. In contrast to Luther, Calvin wrote little about the inner state of his
soul. It seems likely that through the influence of some members of his
circle of humanists, and through his study of Scripture and early Christian
times, he came to the conclusion that he must leave the Roman communion
and follow the route of Protestantism.
    In 1534, he returned to Noyon and gave up the ecclesiastical posts his
father had secured for him, although they were his main source of funds.
Whether by that time he had decided to abandon the Catholic Church, or
this was only one more step in his spiritual pilgrimage to reformation, it is
impossible to ascertain. The fact is that in October of that year Francis I,
who until then had shown relative tolerance toward Protestants, changed his
policy, and in January 1535 Calvin went into exile in Switzerland, in the
Protestant city of Basel.
    He felt called to spend his time in study and literary labors. What he
sought was not to become one of the leaders of the Reformation, but rather
to settle in a calm environment where he could study Scripture and write
about his faith. Shortly before arriving at Basel, he had written a short
treatise on the state of the souls of the dead before the resurrection. What he
now hoped to do was to write other such treatises, to help clarify the faith of
the church in those confused times.




   John Calvin, who spent most of his career in Geneva, was without doubt the most important
                  systematizer of Protestant theology in the sixteenth century.

    His main project on this score was a short summary of the Christian
faith from a Protestant viewpoint. Until then, most Protestant literature,
drawn by the urgency of polemics, had dealt exclusively with the points at
issue, and had said little regarding other basic doctrines such as the Trinity,
the incarnation, and so on. Calvin proposed to fill this vacuum with a short
manual that he called the Institutes of the Christian Religion.
    The first edition of the Institutes appeared in Basel in 1536 and was a
book of 516 pages. It was small in format so that it would fit easily into the
wide pockets that were then in use, which would therefore allow for
discreet circulation throughout France. It had only six chapters. The first
four dealt with the Law, the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, and the sacraments.
The last two, more polemical in tone, summarized the Protestant position
regarding the “false sacraments” of Rome, and Christian freedom.
    The book enjoyed immediate and surprising success. The first edition,
which was in Latin and therefore could be read in several countries, sold
out in nine months. From that point on, Calvin continued working on
successive editions of the Institutes, and these grew in volume through the
years. The controversies of the time, the opinions of various groups that
Calvin believed to be in error, and the practical needs of the church
contributed to the growth of the work; thus, in order to follow Calvin’s
theological development and the various controversies in which he was
involved, it would suffice to compare the successive editions of the
Institutes.
    Another edition appeared in Strasbourg, also in Latin, in 1539. In
Geneva, in 1541, Calvin published the first French edition, which became a
classic of French literature. From that point on, editions were paired, a
French one appearing immediately after one in Latin, as follows: 1543 and
1545, 1550 and 1551, 1559 and 1560. Since the Latin and French editions
of 1559 and 1560 were the last to appear during Calvin’s lifetime, they
constitute the definitive text of the Institutes.
    That definitive text is far removed from the small handbook on the
Christian faith that Calvin published in 1536, for the six chapters of that
early edition had become four books containing a total of eighty chapters.
The first book treats of God and revelation, as well as of creation and the
nature of the human creature. The second is concerned with God as
Redeemer, and how this is made known to us, first in the Old Testament and
then in Jesus Christ. The third shows how, through the Spirit, we can share
in the grace of Jesus Christ, and the fruits this produces. Finally, the fourth
book deals with the “external means” of that sharing, that is, the church and
the sacraments. The entire work shows a profound knowledge, not only of
Scripture, but also of ancient Christian literature—particularly the works of
Augustine—and of the theological controversies of the sixteenth century.
There is no doubt that this was the high point of Protestant systematic
theology at the time of the Reformation.

                      THE REFORMER OF GENEVA
Calvin had no intention of following the active lifestyle of the many
Protestants who, in various parts of Europe, had become leaders of the
Reformation. Although he respected and admired them, he was convinced
that his gifts were not those of the pastor or the leader, but rather those of
the scholar and author. After a short visit to Ferrara, and another to France,
he decided to settle in Strasbourg, where the Protestant cause was
victorious, and where there was theological and literary activity that offered
the proper milieu for the work he proposed to do.
    But the direct route to Strasbourg was closed by military operations, and
Calvin had to make a detour through Geneva. Conditions there were
difficult. Some time earlier, the Protestant city of Bern had sent
missionaries to Geneva. These missionaries had gained the support of a
small nucleus of educated laity who ardently desired the reformation of the
church, and also of a powerful sector of the bourgeoisie whose goal it was
to avoid certain economic and political restrictions that a break with Rome
would abolish. The clergy, apparently with little instruction and even less
conviction, had simply obeyed the orders of the government of Geneva
when it decreed that the mass was abolished, and that the city was now
Protestant. All this had taken place just a few months before Calvin’s arrival
in Geneva, and therefore the Bern missionaries, whose leader was William
Farel, now found themselves at the helm of the religious life of the city, and
sorely lacking in personnel.
    Calvin arrived in Geneva firm in his intention to stop there no longer
than a day before continuing his journey to Strasbourg. But someone told
Farel that the author of the now famous Institutes—published only four
months earlier—was in town, and the result was an unforgettable interview
that Calvin himself later recorded. Farel, who “burned with a marvelous
zeal for the advancement of the gospel,” presented Calvin with several
reasons why his presence was needed in Geneva. Calvin listened
respectfully to the other man, some fifteen years older. But he refused to
heed Farel’s plea, telling him that he had planned certain studies, and that
these would not be possible in the confused situation Farel was describing.
When the latter had exhausted his arguments, and failed to convince the
young theologian, he appealed to their common Lord, and challenged
Calvin with a dire threat: “May God condemn your repose, and the calm
you seek for study, if before such a great need you withdraw, and refuse
your succor and help.” Calvin continues his report: “These words shocked
and broke me, and I desisted from the journey I had begun.”4 Thus began
his career as the Reformer of Geneva.
    Although at first Calvin agreed to no more than lending his aid to the
Protestant leaders of the city, particularly to Farel, soon his theological
insight, his legal training, and his reforming zeal made him the central
figure in the religious life of the city. Farel, who until then had been the
leader of the Protestant cause, gladly became Calvin’s main collaborator
and support. But not all were ready to follow the path of reformation that
Calvin and Farel laid out. As soon as the two pastors began insisting that
the decision to reform the church be taken seriously, many of the
bourgeoisie who had encouraged the break with Rome began demurring,
while they circulated rumors in other Protestant cities regarding the
supposed errors of the Genevan reformers. The conflict finally came to a
head on the matter of church discipline and the right to excommunicate.
Calvin insisted that, if religious life was to conform to the principles of
reformation, it was necessary to excommunicate unrepentant sinners. The
government, then in the hands of the bourgeoisie, refused to allow this,
claiming that it was unwarranted rigorism and a usurpation of government
authority. The final result was that Calvin, who insisted on his position, was
banned from the city. Farel, who was invited to remain, preferred to join his
friend in exile rather than serve as an instrument for the bourgeois in their
quest for a religion with many liberties and no obligations.
    Calvin saw this as the God-given opportunity to return to the life of
writing and scholarship he had projected, and therefore completed his long-
interrupted journey to Strasbourg. But once again peace eluded him. There
was in the city a large community of exiles who had left France for reason
of their faith, and Martin Bucer, the leader of the reformation in Strasbourg,
insisted that Calvin should be their pastor. During this sojourn in Strasbourg
he had long conversations with Bucer, who became his mentor and
profoundly influenced Calvin’s theology and his understanding of pastoral
ministry. It was in the context of these responsibilities that Calvin produced
a French liturgy, as well as French translations of several psalms and other
hymns, to be sung by the exiled French community. While in Strasbourg,
Calvin also prepared the second edition of the Institutes—now much
expanded, and showing signs of Bucer’s influence—and he married Idelette
de Bure, a widow with whom he was very happy until her death in 1549.
   The three years Calvin spent in Strasbourg, from 1538 to 1541, were
probably the happiest and most peaceful of his life. But in spite of this he
regretted being prevented from continuing his work with the church in
Geneva, for which he still felt deep concern. Therefore, when circumstances
changed in the Swiss city, and the new government invited him to return,
Calvin agreed without hesitation.
   Calvin returned to Geneva in 1541, and one of his first concerns was the
preparation of a series of Ecclesiastical Ordinances that the government
approved with some modifications. By this action, the government of the
church in Geneva was placed primarily in the hands of the Consistory,
whose members were the pastors and twelve lay “elders.” Since there were
five pastors, the lay elders held the majority of the positions in the
Consistory. But in spite of this, Calvin’s personal authority was such that
the Consistory usually followed his advice.
The chair in Saint Peter’s Cathedral in Geneva from which Calvin conducted much of his teaching.

    The Ordinances organized the ministry of the church into four orders
which Calvin thought reflected the practice of the New Testament. In this
fourfold distribution of responsibilities, the pastors were in charge of the
ministry of the Word and the sacraments. The teachers, or doctors, were
responsible for the education of the entire community of faith—children as
well as adults. The elders would supervise the religious life of their
neighborhoods, admonishing those who sinned and, if they would not mend
their ways, reporting them to the Consistory. And the deacons were in
charge of the social services of the church.
    During the next twelve years, the Consistory and the government of the
city clashed repeatedly, for the ecclesiastical body, following Calvin’s
promptings, sought to regulate the customs of the citizens—who were also
the members of the church—with a severity not always matched by the
government. By 1553, the opposition had again come to power, and
Calvin’s political position was precarious.
    It was then that the famous process against Michael Servetus took place.
Servetus was a Spanish physician whose physiological studies had made a
significant contribution to medical science. But he was also the author of a
number of theological treatises in which he argued that the union of church
and state after Constantine’s conversion was in truth a great apostasy, and
that the Council of Nicea, in promulgating the doctrine of the Trinity, had
offended God. He had recently escaped from the prisons of the Catholic
Inquisition in France, where he was being tried for heresy, and was passing
through Geneva when he was recognized. He was arrested, and Calvin
prepared a list of thirty-eight accusations against him. Some in Geneva who
opposed Calvin took up Servetus’s cause, arguing that he had been accused
of heresy by Catholics, and therefore that he should be seen as an ally. But
the government of the city asked the advice of the various Protestant
cantons of Switzerland, and all agreed that Servetus was a heretic, not only
by Catholic standards, but also by Protestant ones. This put an end to the
opposition, and Servetus was burned to death—although Calvin had argued
in favor of a less cruel death by beheading.
    Servetus’s death was severely criticized, especially by Sebastian
Castello, whom Calvin had earlier expelled from Geneva for having
interpreted the Song of Songs as a poem of erotic love. Ever since, the
burning of Servetus—a noted physician—has become a symbol of the rigid
dogmatism of Calvin’s Geneva. Undoubtedly, there are grounds for harsh
judgment on the proceedings, and particularly on Calvin’s role in them. But
one should also remember that at that time all over Europe both Protestants
and Catholics were acting in similar fashion against those whom they
considered heretics. Servetus himself was condemned by the French
Inquisition, which had not burned him only because he had escaped.
    After Servetus’s execution, Calvin’s authority in Geneva had no rival.
This was especially true since the theologians of all the other Protestant
cantons had supported him, while his opponents had found themselves in
the difficult position of defending a heretic who had been condemned by
both Catholics and Protestants.
    In 1559, Calvin saw the fulfillment of one of his fondest dreams in the
opening of the Genevan Academy, under the direction of Theodore Beza—
who would eventually succeed him as theological leader of the city. In that
academy, the youth of Geneva were educated according to Calvinist
principles. But its student body also included many from various other parts
of Europe, who later returned to their native lands taking Calvinism with
them.
    As he saw his end approach, Calvin prepared his will and bid farewell to
his closest associates. Farel, who had taken the responsibility of leading the
Reformation in nearby Neuchâtel, paid his friend a last visit. Calvin died on
May 27, 1564.

                       CALVIN AND CALVINISM
During Calvin’s lifetime, the main issue dividing Protestants—except for
the Anabaptists, whom other Protestants considered heretics—was the
manner of the presence of Christ in communion. This was the main point of
conflict between Luther and Zwingli at the Colloquy of Marburg. On this
point, Calvin followed the lead of his friend Martin Bucer, the reformer of
Strasbourg, who took an intermediate position between Luther and Zwingli.
Calvin affirmed that the presence of Christ in communion is real, although
spiritual. This means that such presence is not merely symbolic, nor is
communion a mere devotional exercise; rather, there is in it a true divine
action for the church that partakes of the sacrament. On the other hand, this
does not mean that the body of Christ descends from heaven, nor that it can
be present in several altars at the same time, as Luther claimed. Rather, in
the act of communion, by the power of the Holy Spirit, believers are taken
to heaven and share with Christ in a foretaste of the heavenly banquet.
    In 1526, Bucer, Luther, and others had reached the Wittenberg Concord,
which made room for both Luther’s and Bucer’s views. In 1549, Bucer,
Calvin, the main Swiss Protestant theologians, and several others from
southern Germany, signed the Zürich Consensus, a similar document. Also,
Luther had been pleased with the publication of Calvin’s Institutes.
Therefore, the difference between Calvin and Luther on the presence of
Christ in communion should not have been an insurmountable obstacle to
Protestant unity.
    But the followers of the great teachers were less flexible than their
masters. In 1552, Joachim Westphal, a Lutheran, published a treatise against
Calvin in which he declared that Calvinist views were surreptitiously
making their way into traditionally Lutheran territories, and offered himself
as the champion of Luther’s views on communion. On their part, some
Calvinists accused Lutherans of being practically Catholic in their views on
communion. By then Luther had died, and Melanchthon refused to attack
Calvin, as Westphal demanded. But the net result was a growing distance
between those who followed Luther and those who accepted the Zürich
Consensus, who were then called Reformed in contraposition to Lutherans.
    Therefore, during this early period the main characteristic of Calvinist or
Reformed theology was not its doctrine of predestination—on which the
Reformed generally agreed with Lutherans. What actually distinguished the
Calvinists from the Lutherans was their understanding of communion. It
was in the following century, as we shall see as our story unfolds (Chapter
20) that predestination came to be seen as the hallmark of Calvinism.
    In any case, due partly to the influence of the Genevan Academy, and
partly to the Institutes, Calvin’s theological influence was soon felt in
various other parts of Europe. Eventually, a number of churches appeared—
in the Netherlands, Scotland, Hungary, England, France, and so forth—that
followed the teaching of the Genevan reformer, and are now known as
Reformed or Calvinistic. Significantly, in most of these countries Calvinism
was joined with a zeal for reforming society that did not exist in Lutheran
lands, for Calvinists were convinced that it was their duty to make the civil
government conform to the law of God. Thus, one of the most lasting
consequences of Calvinism—and one that Calvin most likely would never
have imagined—was a series of revolutions that opened the way for the
modern world.
                                    8

       The Reformation in Great Britain


   The universall defection, whereof Saint Paul did prophesy, is easy to
   be espyed as well in religion as in manners. The corruption of life is
   evident, and religion is not measured with the playne Worde of God,
   but by custome, consuetude, will, consent, and determination of men.
                                                             JOHN KNOX


Until early in the seventeenth century, Great Britain was divided between
the house of Tudor in England, and the Stuart kingdom of Scotland. The
two houses were related by blood, and eventually the two kingdoms would
be united. But during the sixteenth century their relationship was one of
enmity and open warfare, and therefore the Reformation followed a
different course in each of them. For this reason, in the present chapter we
shall deal first with the Reformation in England, and then turn to the
Scottish Reformation.

                                HENRY VIII
The sixteenth century opened with Scotland an ally of France, England an
ally of Spain. The hostility between the two great kingdoms on the
Continent was reflected in the hostility between the two British kingdoms.
In order to strengthen his ties with Spain, Henry VII of England arranged
for the marriage of his son and heir, Arthur, to Catherine of Aragon, a
daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain—and therefore an aunt of
Charles V. The wedding took place amid great celebrations when the bride
was fifteen years old, and it should have sealed the friendship between
England and Spain. But Arthur died four months later, and Spain then
proposed a union between the young widow and her deceased husband’s
younger brother, Henry, who was now heir to the English throne. The king
of England, eager to retain both the friendship of Spain and the widow’s
dowry, agreed to the marriage. Since canon law prohibited a man’s marriage
to his brother’s widow, the English representatives in Rome obtained a
papal dispensation, and as soon as young Henry was old enough he was
married to Catherine.
    It was not a happy marriage. In spite of papal dispensation, there was
some doubt as to whether the pope had the power to grant dispensation
from the principle that a man should not marry his brother’s widow. This in
turn meant that the legality of the marriage itself was also in doubt. The
failure of Henry and Catherine to produce a male heir—their only surviving
child was Princess Mary Tudor—could be interpreted as a sign of divine
wrath. The nation had recently suffered the bloodletting of a war of
succession, and therefore it seemed imperative that the king have a male
heir. But after several years of marriage it was clear that such an heir would
not result from Henry’s union to Catherine.
    Several solutions were proposed. Henry himself suggested that his
bastard son, whom he had made duke of Richmond, be declared legitimate,
and made his heir. But such an arrangement would require papal action, and
the pope refused to take a step that would alienate Spain. The cardinal who
was in charge of these negotiations then suggested that Henry arrange the
marriage of Mary with his bastard son. But King Henry felt that marrying
Mary to her own half-brother would only compound the original error of his
marrying his brother’s widow. His own solution was to request that Rome
annul his own union with Catherine, thus leaving him free to marry a queen
with the potential to bear him the necessary heir. It appears that at the time
of his first petition of annulment, Henry was not yet enamored of Anne
Boleyn, and that he was initially moved by reasons of state rather than of
the heart.
    Such annulments were not uncommon, for popes would grant them for
various reasons. In this particular case, the argument was that, in spite of the
papal dispensation, the marriage between Henry and his brother’s widow
was not licit, and that therefore it had never been a true marriage. But other
factors completely unrelated to canon law were much more weighty. The
main consideration was that Catherine was the aunt of Charles V, who at
that time had the pope virtually under his thumb, and who had received a
plea from his aunt to save her from the dishonor of having her marriage
declared illegitimate. The pope, Clement VII, could not invalidate Henry’s
marriage to Catherine without alienating Charles V. He prolonged the
matter as long as possible, and his representatives even suggested that
Henry, instead of repudiating his first wife, secretly take a second one. But
this was no solution, for the king needed a publicly acknowledged heir.
Thomas Cranmer, the king’s main advisor in religious matters, suggested
that he consult the main Catholic universities. The most prestigious of these
—Paris, Orleans, Toulouse, Oxford, Cambridge, and even those in Italy—
declared that Henry’s marriage to Catherine was not valid.




Henry VIII, earlier known for his defense of Catholicism against Luther, and in no way a supporter of
               Protestant doctrine, led the Church of England in its break with Rome.
    From that point on, Henry VIII followed a policy that would eventually
lead to a break with Rome. Ancient laws forbidding appeals to Rome were
reenacted, putting the clergy more directly under the king’s authority. He
also toyed with the idea of retaining funds that normally went to Rome. By
threatening to do so, he forced the pope to name Cranmer archbishop of
Canterbury. His conflicts with the papacy did not mean, however, that he
felt the least sympathy for Protestantism. In fact, a few years earlier he had
published a treatise against Luther that had been acclaimed by Pope Leo X,
who conferred on him the title of “defender of the faith” as a result of it. As
Henry saw matters, what was needed was not a reformation like the one
taking place on the Continent, but rather a restoration of the rights of the
crown against undue papal intervention.
    But Lutheran ideas, joined now with what still remained of Wycliffe’s,
were circulating in England, and those who held to them generally rejoiced
in the growing distance between their sovereign and the papacy. Wycliffe’s
program of reformation included the creation of a national church under the
direction of civil authorities, and Henry’s policies were inexorably leading
in that direction. Such was also the hope of Cranmer, who envisioned a
reformation of the church under royal authority.
    The final break took place in 1534, when Parliament, following the
dictates of the king, enacted a series of laws forbidding the payment of
annates and other such contributions to Rome, ruling that Henry’s marriage
to Catherine was not a true marriage, that therefore Mary was not the
legitimate heir to the throne and, finally, that the king was the “supreme
head of the Church of England.” In order to enforce this last decision,
Parliament also declared that any who dared call the king a schismatic or a
heretic would be considered guilty of treason.
    The most notable figure opposing these laws was Sir Thomas More, who
had been chancellor of the kingdom and a personal friend of Henry VIII. He
refused to swear loyalty to the king as head of the church, and for that
reason was imprisoned. There he was visited by one of his daughters, for
whom he had secured an excellent humanistic education. She tried to
convince him to recant and accept the king’s authority over the church, and
to that end she listed the names of the many respectable and admired people
who had done so. It is said that Thomas More’s answer was: “I never intend
to pin my conscience to another man’s back.” At his trial, the ex-chancellor
defended his position, saying that he had never denied that the king was the
head of the church but had only refused to affirm it, and that one cannot be
condemned for not having said something. But after he had been
condemned to death he openly declared that, in order to clear his
conscience, he wished it to be clear that he did not believe that a layman
such as the king could be the head of the church, nor that any human being
had the authority to change the laws of the church. Five days later, he was
executed in the Tower of London, after declaring that he died “the king’s
good servant, but God’s first.” In 1935, four hundred years after his death,
Thomas More’s name was added to the official list of saints of the Roman
Catholic Church.




 Thomas More was the most famous of the opponents of Henry’s religious policy, and he paid for it
                                         with his life.

   Up until then, what had taken place was little more than a schism, with
no attempt at reformation, and with no more doctrinal content than was
necessary to justify the schism itself. But there were many in England who
felt the need for a thorough reformation, and who saw the events of their
time as an opportunity to achieve it. Typical of this attitude was Cranmer,
who supported the king’s policies in the hope that they would lead to further
and deeper changes.
    Henry VIII was essentially conservative on religious matters. He seems
to have been a firm believer in most of the traditional teachings of the
church, although there is no doubt that his main motivation was political.
Therefore, during his reign the laws having to do with religion wavered
according to changing political considerations.
    Naturally, as soon as he was made head of the church, Henry declared
his marriage to Catherine void, and regularized his secret marriage to Anne
Boleyn that had already taken place. Anne gave him no male heir, but only
a daughter, Elizabeth, and eventually she was accused of adultery and
condemned to death. The king then married Jane Seymour, who finally bore
him a male heir—the future Edward VI. After Jane’s death, Henry tried to
utilize his fourth marriage to establish an alliance with German Lutherans,
for he felt threatened by both Charles V and Francis I of France. For that
reason, he married Anne of Cleves, a sister-in-law of the leading Protestant
prince, John Frederick of Saxony. But when it became apparent that the
Lutherans insisted on their doctrinal positions even though Henry was
opposed to them, and that Charles V and Francis I could not agree on a
common policy against England, Henry divorced his fourth wife, and
ordered that the man who had arranged it be beheaded. The new queen,
Catherine Howard, supported the conservative position, and therefore the
king’s fifth marriage opened a period of difficulties for the advocates of
reformation. Henry reached an agreement with Charles V for a joint
invasion of France. Since he no longer had to fear the emperor, who had
become his ally, he broke all negotiations with German Lutheran leaders. In
England, he took steps to make the church conform as much as possible to
Roman Catholicism, except in the matter of obedience to the pope. He also
refused to restore monasteries, which he had suppressed and confiscated
under pretense of reformation, and whose properties he had no intention of
returning. But Catherine Howard fell into disgrace and was beheaded, and
Charles V, for his own reasons, broke off his alliance with England. The
next and last wife of Henry VIII, Catherine Parr, was a supporter of
reformation, and the position of those who opposed it was precarious when
the king died, early in 1547.
    During all the years of Henry’s reign, at times with the king’s support
and at times against his wishes, ideas of reformation had spread throughout
the nation. Cranmer had ordered that the Bible be translated into English,
and by royal decree a great English Bible had been placed in every church,
at a place where all could read it. (Interestingly, the impact of the different
translations of the time may still be seen in the Lord’s Prayer as it is said
throughout the English-speaking world, where some say “trespasses”
following William Tyndale’s translation, and others “debts” following
Myles Coverdale’s.) The English Bible was a powerful weapon in the hands
of the advocates of reform, who went from place to place drawing attention
to those passages in Scripture that supported their teachings and their goals.
The suppression of monasteries deprived the conservative wing of its
staunchest allies. And the humanists, who were both numerous and
powerful, saw in the royal policies an opportunity to achieve a reformation
without what they considered to be the excesses of German Protestants. The
net result was that at the time of Henry’s death the advocates of reformation
had ample support throughout the kingdom.

                                EDWARD VI
Henry had decided, and Parliament had agreed, that he would be succeeded
by his only male heir, Edward, and then by his two daughters Mary and
Elizabeth, in the order of their birth. Edward was a sickly young man who
lived only six years after his father’s death. The first three years of
Edward’s reign, under the regency of the duke of Somerset, were a period
of great advances for the cause of the reformers. The cup in communion
was restored to the laity, members of the clergy were allowed to marry, and
images were withdrawn from the churches. But the most important religious
achievement of Somerset’s regency was the publication of the Book of
Common Prayer, whose main author was Cranmer and which, for the first
time, gave the English people a liturgy in their own language.
    After Somerset’s regency, the post fell to the duke of Northumberland, a
man of lesser principles than his predecessor, but who for reasons of
expediency continued the policies of reformation. During his regency a
revised edition of the Book of Common Prayer was published. The
Zwinglian tendency of this new edition is apparent when one compares the
words the minister is to say in offering the bread to the communicants. The
earlier version reads: “The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given
for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life.” The new edition
reads: “Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed
on him in thy heart by faith with thanksgiving.” While the first edition
could be understood either in a Catholic or in a Lutheran sense, the second
clearly drew its inspiration from Zwingli and those who held similar
positions. This difference between the two books was an indication of the
direction in which things were moving in England. The leaders of the
reformist party, who were increasingly inclined toward Reformed theology,
had reasons to hope that their cause would win without great opposition.

                               MARY TUDOR
When Edward VI died, the crown went to his half-sister Mary, the daughter
of Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon. Mary had always been a Catholic,
for in her experience the movement of reformation had begun with her own
dishonor in her youth, when she had been declared an illegitimate child.
Furthermore, if Henry had been correct in proclaiming himself head of the
church and his marriage to Catherine null and void, Mary was a bastard,
and her right to succession could be cast into doubt. Therefore, for reasons
both of conviction and of political necessity, Mary was committed to the
goal of restoring Roman Catholicism in England. In this task she had the
powerful support of her cousin Charles V, and also of a number of
conservative bishops who had been deposed during the two previous reigns.
But she knew that she must move with caution, so during the first months of
her reign she took the time to consolidate her position within England,
while she strengthened her ties with the Catholic house of Hapsburg by
marrying her cousin Philip of Spain—later Philip II.
   As soon as she felt herself secure on the throne, however, Mary began a
series of increasingly repressive measures against Protestants. Late in 1554,
England officially returned to obedience to the pope. Most of what had been
done during the reigns of Henry and Edward was now undone. The feast
days of the saints were restored. Married clergy were ordered to set their
wives aside. Finally, open persecution of Protestant leaders became the
policy of the kingdom. Almost three hundred of them were burned, while
countless others were imprisoned or went into exile. For these reasons, the
queen acquired the name by which she is known to this day: Bloody Mary.
    In 1563, five years after Mary’s death, the suffering of Protestants under
her reign was highlighted in John Foxe’s Book of Martyrs. Foxe had begun
writing his book long before Mary’s reign, and originally conceived his
work as a tribute to martyrs of all time. But as news of what was taking
place in England under Queen Mary reached him in exile in Strasbourg, the
focus of the book shifted, giving much more emphasis to the more recent
English Protestant martyrs. This new focus may be seen in the full title of
the book, Actes and Monuments of these Latter and Perillous Dayes,
Touching Matters of the Church. The book’s impact was greatly
strengthened by numerous woodcuts depicting sundry and cruel
martyrdoms. In part, thanks to those woodcuts, it soon became standard fare
in the education of children, particularly among Puritans, and thus
contributed to a long-lasting animosity against Catholics and their faith.




 Mary Tudor, nicknamed by the Protestants “Bloody Mary,” restored Catholicism, and during her
    reign most of the Protestant leaders who did not go into exile were condemned to death.
   The most illustrious of the martyrs during Mary’s reign was Cranmer.
Since he was archbishop of Canterbury, his case was sent to Rome, where
he was condemned as a heretic and burned in effigy. But the queen’s goal
was to force the figurehead of the reformist party to recant, thus achieving a
moral victory over the Protestants. To that end, he was forced to watch from
his prison the execution of two of his main supporters, close associates in
his work of reformation, Bishops Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Ridley.
Eventually, Cranmer did sign a recantation. To this day historians debate
whether he did this out of fear of the pyre, or rather because he had always
declared that he would obey his sovereigns. In all likelihood, he did not
know his exact motives himself. The fact is that he did recant in writing,
and that in spite of this he was condemned to death, as an example to any
would-be followers. Arrangements were then made for a public recantation
before his death. The archbishop was taken to the Church of St. Mary,
where a wooden platform had been set up, and after the sermon he was
given the opportunity to recant. He began by speaking of his sins and his
weakness, and all expected him to conclude by declaring that he had sinned
in leaving the Church of Rome. But he surprised his tormentors by
withdrawing his words of recantation:

   They were written contrary to the truth which I thought in my heart,
   and written for fear of death, to save my life if it might be. . . . And
   forasmuch as I have written many things contrary to what I believe in
   my heart, my hand shall first be punished; for if I may come to the
   fire it shall first be burned. As for the Pope, I refuse him, for Christ’s
   enemy and antichrist, with all his false doctrine.

    That last act of valor of the elderly man—who did in fact hold his hand
in the fire until it was charred—caused his earlier wavering to be forgotten,
and Protestants considered Cranmer the great hero of their cause. Heartened
by his example, many insisted on spreading Protestant teachings, and it
became increasingly clear that Mary would have to take even harsher
measures if Protestantism was to be eradicated.

                                ELIZABETH
Mary died late in 1558, and was succeeded by her half-sister Elizabeth, the
daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn. Charles V had repeatedly
suggested that Mary have her half-sister executed, but the Bloody Queen
had not dared go that far, and now her policies were undone by her
predessesor. This was also the time when many who had left the kingdom
for religious reasons returned to their homeland, bringing with them
Zwinglian and Calvinist ideas they had learned on the Continent. Just as
Mary had been a Catholic both out of conviction and out of political
necessity, Elizabeth was a Protestant for similar reasons. If the head of the
church in England was the pope, and not the king, it followed that the
marriage of Henry VIII with Catherine of Aragon was valid, and that
Elizabeth, born from Anne Boleyn while Catherine still lived, was
illegitimate. Paul IV, who was then pope, indicated that he was ready to
declare Elizabeth a legitimate daughter of Henry, as long as she continued
in the Roman communion. But Elizabeth did not even notify him of her
elevation to the throne, and recalled the English ambassador to Rome.
Although much more politically inclined than Mary, she had been brought
up to believe that her father had done right in proclaiming himself head of
the Church of England, and she would not waver in that conviction.
    Elizabeth was not a Protestant extremist. Her ideal was a church whose
practices were uniform, thus uniting the kingdom in common worship, but
in which there would also be great latitude for varying opinions. Within that
church, there would be no place for either Roman Catholicism or extreme
Protestantism. But any moderate form of Protestantism would be
acceptable, as long as it participated in the common worship of the Church
of England.
    Elizabeth’s religious policy found expression and support in a new
edition of the Book of Common Prayer. As an indication of her policy of
theological inclusiveness, the new book combined the two different
formulas that the earlier versions ordered ministers to use in the distribution
of the bread. The new text read as follows:

   The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve
   thy body and soul unto everlasting life. Take and eat this in
   remembrance that Christ died for thee and feed on Him in thy heart
   by faith with thanksgiving.

    Naturally, the purpose of this double formula was to accommodate the
divergent opinions of those who believed that communion was simply an
act of remembrance, and those who insisted that in it one really partook of
the body of Christ.
    The same policy may be seen in the Thirty-nine Articles, promulgated in
1562 in order to serve as doctrinal foundation for the Church of England. In
them several Catholic doctrines and practices are explicitly rejected, but
there is no attempt to choose among the various Protestant views. On the
contrary, the articles seek to achieve a via media in which all but Roman
Catholics and the most doctrinaire Protestants could participate. Ever since
that time, this has been one of the main characteristics of the Anglican
Communion—that is, the Church of England and those religions derived
from it.
    During Elizabeth’s reign Catholicism continued a precarious existence in
England. Some Catholics took up the cause of Mary Stuart, the queen of
Scotland who had been forced into exile in England and whose career we
shall follow in the next section of this chapter. Were Elizabeth to be
declared illegitimate, Mary Stuart would gain the English throne. Therefore,
she was the focal point of several conspiracies by Catholics, whom the pope
had declared free from any obligation of obedience to Elizabeth. Exiled
Catholic leaders declared that Elizabeth was a heretical usurper, and plotted
her downfall and the elevation of Mary Stuart to the throne of England.
Meanwhile, graduates of Catholic seminaries in exile secretly returned to
England, where they risked their lives taking sacraments to the faithful. It
was difficult to distinguish between secret meetings for forbidden worship,
and conspiracies against the queen and her government. Infiltrated priests
and Catholics who conspired against the queen were equally captured and
put to death. There was abundant proof of conspiracies against the queen’s
life and most of these centered on the hope of crowning Mary Stuart.
Whether or not Mary herself inspired such conspiracies is not clear. But in
the end she was involved in them and Elizabeth, after much hesitation,
ordered that her cousin be put to death.
    The total number of those executed for religious reasons during
Elizabeth’s reign was approximately equal to those who died under her half-
sister Mary Tudor—although it should be remembered that Elizabeth’s
reign was almost ten times as long as Mary’s. In any case, toward the end of
Elizabeth’s life, Catholics were indicating that they were ready to
distinguish between their religious obedience to the pope and their political
and civil loyalty to the queen. It was on the basis of this distinction that they
would eventually be allowed to practice their religion openly.
    It was also toward the end of Elizabeth’s reign that the Puritans began to
grow in number. They were called Puritans because, inspired by Calvinist
ideas, they insisted on the need to restore the pure practices and doctrines of
the New Testament. Since it was at a later time that they became a driving
force in English religious life, we shall postpone our discussion of them
until another chapter in our story (see Chapter 18).

                  THE REFORMATION IN SCOTLAND
The kingdom of Scotland, to the north of England, had traditionally
followed the policy of seeking the support of France against the English,
who frequently invaded its territories. But in the sixteenth century the
country was divided between those who supported that traditional policy,
and those who held that circumstances had changed, and that it was in the
nation’s best interest to establish closer ties with England. The advocates of
the new policy gained a major victory in 1502, when James IV of Scotland
married Margaret Tudor, a daughter of Henry VII of England. Therefore,
when Henry VIII became king of England, there was hope that the two
kingdoms could finally live in peace with each other. James V, the son of
James IV and Margaret Tudor, was Henry’s nephew, and the latter sought
even closer ties by offering James the hand of his daughter Mary. But
Scotland decided to return to its traditional alliance with France, and to that
end James married the French Mary of Guise. From that point on, the two
British kingdoms followed opposite courses, particularly in matters
affecting the reformation of the church and relations with the papacy.
    While these events were taking place, Protestantism had been making its
way into Scotland. Since a much earlier date, the doctrines of the Lollards
and the Hussites had found followers in the country, and it had been
impossible to uproot them. Now Protestantism found fertile soil among
those who held to such doctrines. Many Scots who had studied in Germany
returned to their homeland, taking with them the ideas and writings of
Luther and other reformers. The Scottish Parliament issued laws against
those writings, and against those who sought to spread Protestant teachings.
The year 1528 saw the first martyrdom of one of these itinerant preachers,
and after that time ever-increasing numbers were executed. But it was all in
vain. In spite of persecution, the new doctrines continued gaining adherents.
The spread of Protestantism was particularly noticeable among the nobility,
who resented the growing power of the crown and the loss of many of their
ancient privileges, and among university students, who constantly read and
circulated the smuggled books of Protestant authors.
    When James V died in 1542, the heir to the throne was his infant
daughter Mary Stuart, and this led to a power struggle. Henry VIII sought to
marry the infant queen to his son and heir, Edward—a plan supported by
the Protestant Scottish nobles, who were also Anglophiles. The Catholics,
Francophiles, wished to see Mary sent to France for her education and
married to a French prince. In this they succeeded, thus foiling Henry’s
plans.




These letters mark the spot where Patrick Hamilton, who had read the works of Luther while on the
  Continent, was burned at the stake, thus becoming the first martyr of the Scottish Reformation.

    On their part, a group of Protestant conspirators took the castle of St.
Andrew, and killed the Protestant archbishop. The government, torn by
inner conflict, could do little. An army was sent to capture and punish the
rebels, but after a short siege the troops were withdrawn, and Protestants
throughout the kingdom began considering St. Andrew’s the bastion of their
faith.
    It was then that John Knox entered the scene. Little is known of the
early years of this fiery reformer, who soon became the leader of Scottish
Protestantism. Born in or about 1515, he studied theology, and was
ordained a priest before 1540. He then became a tutor to the sons of two
noblemen who conspired to take St. Andrew’s, and he had also been in
contact with George Wishart—a famous Protestant preacher who had died
for his faith. When the conspirators took possession of St. Andrew’s, he was
ordered to take his young charges to the castle. Although he planned to
leave for Germany after delivering the young boys and to devote some time
to the study of Protestant theology, once he arrived at St. Andrew’s, he
found himself inextricably involved in the events that were shaking the
nation. Against his own will, he was made preacher of the Protestant
community, and from that time he was the main spokesman for the cause of
reformation in Scotland.
    The Protestants holed up in St. Andrew’s were able to hold out because
both England and France were going through difficult times and could not
intervene in Scottish affairs. But as soon as France found itself free to send
reinforcements to Scotland, the government sent a strong army to storm the
castle, and the Protestants had to surrender. Although this was in violation
of the terms of surrender, Knox and several others were condemned to the
galleys, where the future reformer spent nineteen months in cruel labor. He
was finally released thanks to the intervention of England, where Edward
VI now ruled, and where Knox later became a pastor.
    That English interlude ended when the death of Edward placed Mary
Tudor on the English throne, and persecution broke out against
Protestantism. Knox then went to Switzerland, where he was able to spend
some time in Geneva with Calvin, and in Zürich with Bullinger, Zwingli’s
successor. He also visited Scotland on two occasions, seeking to strengthen
the resolve of the Protestant community.
    Meanwhile, important events were taking place in Scotland. Young
Mary Stuart had been sent to France, where she enjoyed the protection of
her relatives in the house of Guise. Her mother, also of that family,
remained in Scotland as regent. In April 1558, Mary married the heir to the
French throne, who slightly more than a year later was crowned Francis II.
Thus Mary, sixteen years old, was both queen consort of France and titular
queen of Scotland. But such titles and honors were not enough, for she also
claimed to be the legitimate queen of England. Mary Tudor had died in
1558, and had been succeeded by her half-sister Elizabeth. But if Elizabeth
was illegitimate, as Catholics claimed, the throne belonged to Mary Stuart,
great-granddaughter of Henry VII. Therefore, upon Mary Tudor’s death,
Mary Stuart took the title of queen of England, which made her the avowed
enemy of her cousin Elizabeth. In Scotland, the queen mother Mary of
Guise ruled as regent. Her pro-Catholic policies forced Protestant leaders to
unite and, late in 1557, they made a solemn covenant. Since they promised
to serve “the very blessed Word of God, and His congregation,” they were
known as Lords of the Congregation. They were aware that their cause was
similar to that of English Protestants, and established ties with them. The
regent ordered increased persecution against the “heretics,” but they
persisted in their position, and in 1558 organized themselves into a church.
Shortly before that, they had written to Switzerland, asking Knox to return
to Scotland.
    In exile, Knox had written a virulent attack against the women who then
reigned in Europe: the regent of Scotland, Mary Tudor in England, and
Catherine de Medici in France. His work, The First Blast of the Trumpet
against the Monstrous Regiment of Women, was poorly timed, for it had
scarcely been circulated in England when Mary Tudor died and was
succeeded by Elizabeth. Although the book was written against her now
dead half-sister, Elizabeth resented much of what it said, for its arguments
based on anti-feminine prejudice could just as easily apply to her. This
hindered the natural alliance that should have developed between Elizabeth
and John Knox, whose repeated retractions did not suffice to appease the
English queen.
    Events were not working in favor of the Scottish Protestants. The regent
requested troops from France in order to crush the Lords of the
Congregation. The latter did achieve some victories over the invaders. But
their army, lacking in material resources, could not remain in the field for
long. They sent repeated appeals to England, arguing that, if the Catholics
were able to crush the Protestant rebellion in Scotland, and that kingdom
was thus in the hands of the Catholic faction, and closely tied to France,
Elizabeth’s crown would be endangered. Knox, who had returned shortly
before these events, sustained the Protestants with his sermons and the force
of his conviction. Finally, early in 1560, Elizabeth decided to send troops to
Scotland. The English army joined the Scottish Protestants, and a long war
seemed inevitable. But then the regent died, and the French decided that it
was time to sue for peace. As a result, both the French and the English
withdrew their troops.
    As soon as the immediate danger was past, however, disputes began
between Knox and the lords, who until then had supported the cause of
reformation. Although other reasons were adduced, at bottom the conflict
was economic. The lords sought possession of the riches of the church,
while Knox and his supporters wished to employ those resources for
establishing a system of universal education, to lighten the load of the poor,
and for the support of the church.
    In the midst of such struggles, the nobles decided to invite Mary Stuart
to return to Scotland and claim the throne she had inherited from her father.
Mary had hoped to remain in France as queen of that country, but the death
of her husband had deprived her of that honor, and therefore she agreed to
the Scottish request. She arrived in Scotland in 1561. Although she had
never been popular, at first she was content to follow the advice of her
bastard half-brother James Stuart, earl of Moray, a Protestant leader who
prevented her from immediately alienating the other Protestant lords.
    Knox himself seems to have been convinced that a clash with the queen
was inevitable, and on this she probably agreed with him. From the time of
her arrival, Mary insisted on having mass celebrated in her private chapel,
and the fiery reformer began preaching against the “idolatry” of the “new
Jezebel.” The two had a number of increasingly tempestuous interviews.
But the lords, content with the existing situation, did not follow the
preacher in his extremism.
    The growing tension with the queen, and with some of the Protestant
lords, did not prevent Knox and his followers from organizing the
Reformed Church of Scotland, whose polity was similar to later
Presbyterianism. In each church, elders were elected, as was a minister,
although the latter could not be installed before being examined by the
other ministers. The pillars of the new church were the Book of Discipline,
the Book of Common Order, and the Scots Confession.
    In the end, Mary Stuart caused her own downfall. She had always
dreamed of sitting on the throne of England, and in pursuit of that dream
she lost first her own throne and then her life. In order to strengthen her
claim to the English throne, she married her cousin Henry Stuart, Lord
Darnley, who also had a distant claim to it. Moray objected to this marriage
and to Mary’s agreement with Spain to uproot Protestantism in her own
country, and when his objections went unheeded he rebelled. Mary then
called upon James Hepburn, Lord Bothwell, an able military leader who
defeated Moray and forced him to seek refuge in London. Encouraged by
this victory, Mary declared that she would soon sit on the throne in London.
    Having lost Moray’s counsel, Mary’s policies became increasingly
unwise. She decided that she had made a mistake in marrying Darnley, and
let her feelings be known to Bothwell and others. Shortly thereafter,
Darnley was murdered, and the main suspect was Bothwell. He was legally
exonerated in a trial in which no witnesses for the prosecution were
allowed. But this did little to allay suspicion, particularly since Mary
married Bothwell a few months later.
    The Scottish lords hated Bothwell, and they soon rebelled. When the
queen sought to quell the rebellion, she discovered that her troops were not
willing to support her cause, and she found herself in the hands of the lords.
These convinced her that they had proof of her participation in Darnley’s
death, and gave her the choice of either abdicating or being tried for murder.
She abdicated in favor of her one-year-old son James VI, whom she had had
with Darnley, and Moray returned from England as regent of Scotland.
Mary managed to escape and raise an army in support of her cause. But she
was defeated by Moray’s troops, and her only recourse was to flee to
England and seek refuge under her hated cousin Elizabeth.
    Romantic imagination has woven many a tale around Mary’s captivity
and death, making her a martyr in the hands of a cruel and ambitious
cousin. The truth is that Elizabeth received her with greater courtesy than
could be expected for someone who had so long declared her illegitimate in
an effort to take possession of her crown. Although she was a prisoner in
the sense that she was not allowed to leave the castle of her residence, there
were strict orders that she should be treated as a queen, and she was allowed
to choose her own body of thirty servants. But she was the hub of many a
conspiracy, most of which included the death of Elizabeth, who was the
main obstacle in her path to the English throne and to the restoration of
Catholicism in England. Another common element of most of these
conspiracies was the invasion of England by Spanish troops in support of
Mary’s cause. When the third such conspiracy was discovered, with clear
proof that Mary was, if not the instigator of the plot, at least a willing
participant, she was tried and condemned to death. When she was finally
taken before the executioner, she faced death with royal dignity.
    In Scotland, Mary’s exile did not put an end to disputes among the
various parties. Knox supported the regency of Moray. But there was still
significant opposition when the reformer suffered an attack of paralysis and
had to withdraw from active life. When he heard of the St. Bartholomew’s
Day Massacre of Protestants in France—of which we shall say more in
Chapter 11—he made a last effort to return to the pulpit, where he told his
fellow Scots that they must continue their struggle, lest they suffer a similar
fate. He died a few days after this last sermon. By then, it was becoming
apparent that Scotland had been won by the Reformed tradition.
                                    9

           Further Developments within
                   Lutheranism


   A Christian ruler may and must defend his subjects against every
   higher authority that seeks to force them to deny the Word of God
   and practice idolatry.
                                           MAGDEBURG CONFESSION (1550)


                    THE WAR OF SCHMALKALDEN
The peace of Nuremberg, signed in 1532, allowed Protestants the free
exercise of their faith in their own territories but prohibited any further
expansion of Protestantism. It seems that Charles V thus hoped to contain
the advance of Lutheran heresy until he could gather the resources
necessary to eliminate it. But such a policy was doomed to failure for, in
spite of the stipulations of Nuremberg, Protestantism continued its
expansion.
    The political situation in Germany was extremely complex and fluid.
Although Charles was emperor, many interests hampered full exercise of
his authority. Even apart from religious matters, there were many who
feared the growing power of the house of Hapsburg, which Charles headed.
Some of these were Catholic princes who suspected that Charles would use
his opposition to Lutheranism for the aggrandizement of his house, and thus
they were not willing to commit fully to the anti-Protestant crusade Charles
hoped to organize. Furthermore, one of the most powerful princes blocking
the house of Hapsburg was Philip of Hesse, who was also the leader of the
League of Schmalkalden. For these reasons, the emperor could not stop the
expansion of Protestantism into lands in which it should not have been
permitted according to the terms agreed on at Nuremberg.
    In 1534, Philip of Hesse wrested the duchy of Württemberg from the
Catholics, who had taken possession of it. After diplomatic maneuvers
assured him that other Catholic princes would not intervene, Philip invaded
the duchy and recalled its exiled duke, who then declared himself for
Protestantism. The population of the duchy had already given signs of
inclination toward Lutheranism and soon took up the religious allegiance of
its restored prince.
    Another severe blow for German Catholicism was the death of Duke
George of Saxony, in 1539. Saxony comprised two separate territories,
Ducal Saxony and Electoral Saxony. The latter, under the rule of Frederick
the Wise, had been the cradle of Lutheranism. But Ducal Saxony had
resisted the new faith, and Duke George had been one of the most bitter
enemies of Luther and his followers. At his death, his brother and successor,
Henry, declared himself a Protestant, and Luther was invited to preach in
the capital, Leipzig, where years earlier he had debated Eck.
    In the same year of the death of Duke George of Saxony, Brandenburg
also became Protestant, and there was even talk that the three ecclesiastical
electors, the archbishops of Trier, Cologne, and Mainz, were considering
embracing the Protestant faith. This would give Protestants a clear majority
in the electoral college of seven magnates—four lay princes and three
archbishops—whose task it would be to choose the next emperor.
    Charles’s hands were tied, for he was involved in too many conflicts
spread across distant parts of the world, and all he could do was encourage
the Catholic princes to form an alliance to rival the League of
Schmalkalden. This was the League of Nuremberg, founded in 1539. Faced
by political realities, Charles also turned to a more conciliatory policy,
seeking a rapprochement between Catholics and Protestants. Under this
new policy, several dialogues took place but with little or no result.
Meanwhile, the League of Schmalkalden took over the territories of Henry
of Brunswick, the emperor’s staunchest ally in northern Germany, and the
area became Protestant. Several bishops who were also feudal lords,
realizing that the majority of the people in their dioceses leaned toward
Lutheranism, turned their possessions into secular states, made themselves
into hereditary lords, and declared for Protestantism. Naturally, in such
moves there was a great deal of personal ambition. But the fact remained
that Protestantism seemed on the verge of overrunning all of Germany, and
that for more than ten years the emperor and the pope saw their power and
influence diminish.
    Shortly thereafter, however, Protestantism would suffer several severe
blows. The first of these was the bigamy of Philip of Hesse. This prince, the
leader of the League of Schmalkalden, was a sincere man, firmly committed
to the Protestant cause. His conscience, however, was deeply troubled
because for years he had had no marital life with his wife, and he found it
impossible to remain celibate. He was no libertine, but rather a man
tormented by his sexual appetites, and by the guilt that he felt at their illicit
satisfaction. He consulted the main Protestant theologians, and Luther,
Melanchthon, and Bucer—the reformer of Strasbourg—agreed that the
Bible did not forbid polygamy, and that Philip could take a second wife
without setting the first aside. It was necessary, however, for this to be done
in secret, for although polygamy was not a crime in God’s eyes, it was such
in the eyes of civil law. This Philip did, and when the secret became public
the ensuing scandal put both Philip and his theological advisors in an
extremely difficult position. Besides the enormous loss of moral authority
these events implied, they also weakened the League of Schmalkalden, for
many of its members objected to Philip’s continuing leadership.
    The second blow was the refusal of Duke Maurice of Saxony to join the
league. While declaring himself a Protestant, he insisted on carrying out his
own independent policy. When Charles explained that he was not opposing
Protestantism, but only the rebellion of the Lutheran princes, and promised
him special consideration, Maurice decided to believe the emperor, and to
take his side against the League of Schmalkalden.
    The third blow was Luther’s death, in 1546. Although he had lost much
prestige as a result of the peasant’s rebellion and the bigamy of Philip of
Hesse, Luther was still the only figure who could unite Protestants under a
single banner. His death, shortly after the discovery of Philip’s bigamy, left
the Protestant party headless both politically and spiritually.
    But the most severe blow came from the emperor, who was finally free
to turn his attention to Germany, and was eager to avenge the obstinate
rebelliousness of the Protestant princes and the humiliations he had suffered
because of them. Profiting from the disarray in the Protestant ranks, and
with the support of Duke Maurice, Charles invaded Germany and captured
both Philip of Hesse and John Frederick, the son and successor of Frederick
the Wise.

                              THE INTERIM
In spite of his military victory, the emperor knew that it was too late to
impose his will on religious matters, and therefore was content with
promulgating the Augsburg Interim, written by a joint commission of
Catholic and Protestant theologians. By the emperor’s command, all
Germans were to obey this Interim, so called because it was to be the law of
the land until a General Council could be convened to decide on the issues
in debate. (The Council of Trent had begun its sessions three years earlier,
in 1545; but the pope and the emperor were at odds, and therefore the latter
refused to accept that council as valid.) Charles hoped to reform the church
in Germany, as was already being done in Spain since the reign of his
grandmother Isabella—that is, by prosecuting abuse and corruption,
encouraging piety and learning, and disallowing any doctrinal divergence.
By means of the Interim, he hoped to gain the time necessary to set in
motion such a reformation.
    But neither Catholics nor Protestants were gratified by this attempt to
legislate on matters of conscience. There was general resistance to the
Interim. Several Protestant theologians flatly refused to obey it. Those at
Wittenberg, led by Melanchthon, finally agreed to a modified version, the
Leipzig Interim. But even this was not acceptable to the majority of
Lutherans, who accused Melanchthon and his followers of cowardice. The
latter responded by arguing that it was necessary to distinguish between the
essential and the peripheral—the adiaphora—and that they had made
concessions in peripheral matters in order to be able to continue preaching
and practicing the essential.
    In any case, Charles was unable to exploit the advantages gained by the
War of Schmalkalden. Many German princes, among them several
Catholics, protested against the ill treatment received by Philip of Hesse
and John Frederick of Saxony. There were rumors that in order to capture
Philip, Charles had made use of means that sullied his honor. The Protestant
princes, sharply divided before the war, were drawn together by their
opposition to the Interim. Both the pope and the king of France resented
Charles’s successes and made diplomatic maneuvers to hamper him.
    Soon the Protestant princes were conspiring against Charles V. Maurice
of Saxony, discontent with the emperor’s rewards for his betrayal of the
Protestant cause, and fearing the growing power of the house of Hapsburg,
joined the conspiracy, which sent an embassy to the king of France in order
to secure his support. When rebellion finally broke out, the armies of King
Henry II of France invaded Charles’s possessions beyond the Rhine. The
troops on whose loyalty the emperor could depend were not sufficient to
wage combat, and therefore Charles was forced to flee. Even this was not
easy, for Maurice of Saxony had taken possession of several strategic
places, and Charles was nearly taken prisoner. After his escape, Charles
instructed his armies to retake Metz, which the French had taken. But the
French repulsed the attack, and the Protestant princes continued in open
revolt. Toward the end of his career, it must have appeared to Charles that
his German policy was an almost complete failure.
Emperor Charles V, who was also Charles I of Spain, was firmly convinced of the need to stamp out
          Protestantism, but various political necessities repeatedly stayed his hand.

    Charles had increasingly delegated German affairs to his brother
Ferdinand, who finally agreed with the rebellious princes to the Peace of
Passau. By the terms of this agreement, Philip of Hesse and John Frederick
of Saxony were freed, and freedom of religion was granted throughout the
empire. This freedom, however, had a number of limitations. It did not
mean that all subjects were free to choose their own religion, but rather that
local rulers could make that decision for themselves and for their subjects—
the principle of cuius regio, eius religio—and that the emperor would not
insist on the return of the Protestant princes to Catholicism. Also, the
freedom this treaty granted applied only to those who held either to
traditional Catholicism or to the Confession of Augsburg. Anabaptists and
Reformed were not included in its provisions.
    In part, his failure in Germany led Charles to relinquish his power and
seek the peace of the monastery. In 1555, he began to rid himself of his
territories. In favor of his son Philip he abdicated first the Low Countries
and then his Italian possessions and the throne of Spain. The following year,
he formally resigned as emperor and withdrew to the monastery of St.
Yuste, in Spain, where he still surrounded himself with imperial pomp, and
continued serving as an advisor to his son Philip II of Spain. He died two
years later, in September 1558.
    The new emperor, Ferdinand I, abandoned his brother’s religious policy,
and was so tolerant that some Catholics feared that he had secretly become
a Protestant. Under his rule, and that of his successor Maximilian II,
Protestantism continued expanding to new areas, which included Austria
itself, the main hereditary possession of the Hapsburgs. The resulting
tensions with Catholic leaders repeatedly broke out in minor political and
military clashes. Finally, in the next century, these led to the Thirty Years’
War, to which we shall return later.

                   SCANDINAVIAN LUTHERANISM
While all this was taking place in Germany, Luther’s impact was also being
felt in neighboring Scandinavia. But, while in Germany the Reformation
and the ensuing struggles divided the country and helped the high nobility
assert its power over against the monarchy, in Scandinavia the Reformation
had the opposite effect. There monarchs took up the Reformation as their
cause, and its triumph was also theirs.
    In theory, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden were a united kingdom. But in
truth the king ruled only Denmark, where he resided. His power in Norway
was limited, and in Sweden it was nil, where the powerful house of Sture,
with the title of regents, held sway. Even in Denmark itself, royal authority
was limited by the power of the aristocracy and of the ecclesiastical
hierarchy, who staunchly defended their ancient privileges against every
encroachment on the king’s part. Since the crown was elective, at the time
of each election the magnates, both civil and ecclesiastic, wrung new
concessions from those who would be elected. The people, oppressed by
great secular and ecclesiastical lords, could do nothing but pay ever-
increasing taxes and obey laws designed for the protection of the powerful.
    When the Reformation broke out in Germany, the Scandinavian throne
was occupied by Christian II, who was married to Charles V’s sister
Isabella. Since the Swedes would not allow him effective power in their
land, he appealed to his brother-in-law and to other princes, and with
largely foreign troops moved into Sweden and had himself crowned at
Stockholm. Although he had vowed to spare the lives of his Swedish
enemies, a few days after his coronation he ordered what came to be known
as the Massacre of Stockholm, in which the nation’s leading aristocrats and
ecclesiastics were murdered.
    The Massacre of Stockholm caused grave resentment, not only in
Sweden, but also in Norway and even in Denmark. Magnates throughout
Christian’s territories feared that, after destroying Swedish aristocracy, the
king would turn on them. Christian claimed that he sought to free the
people of Sweden from the oppression of its own aristocracy. But the
treacherous means by which he had disposed of his enemies, and the intense
ecclesiastical propaganda against him, soon lost him any popularity he
might have garnered.
    Christian then tried to use the Reformation as a tool for his own ends.
Shortly before these events, the first Lutheran preachers had made their way
into Denmark, and the people seemed ready to lend them an attentive ear.
But again this policy failed, for it exacerbated the prelates’ enmity toward
the king, at a time when most Protestants preferred to keep their distance
from the instigator of the Massacre of Stockholm. Eventually, rebellion
broke out, and Christian was forced to flee. He returned eight years later,
now with the support of several Catholic rulers from other parts of Europe.
He landed in Norway and declared himself the champion of Catholicism.
But his uncle and successor, Frederick I, defeated and imprisoned him. He
remained in prison the rest of his days—for twenty-seven years.
    Frederick I was a Protestant, and by that time many of the people and
the nobility were of similar persuasion. But, at the time of his election, the
new king promised that he would neither attack Catholicism nor use his
authority to favor Protestantism. He realized that it was better to be the true
king of a smaller kingdom than the fictitious ruler of a large one, and
therefore gave up all claim to the Swedish crown, and allowed Norway to
elect its own king. The Norwegians then elected him, and thus Frederick
was able to retain part of the older Scandinavian union without having to
resort to his nephew’s tyrannical methods. Being able to concentrate on the
affairs of Denmark and Norway, he took steps to consolidate the power of
the crown in those two kingdoms. In religious matters, he kept the vows he
had taken at the time of his election. But Protestantism, allowed free rein,
made rapid gains. In 1527, it was officially recognized and granted
toleration, and by the time of Frederick’s death in 1533 most of his subjects
were Protestants.
    At that point there was an attempt to impose a Catholic king on the land
by means of foreign intervention. But the pretender was defeated, and the
new ruler was Christian III, a convinced Lutheran who had been present at
the Diet of Worms and who greatly admired Luther both for his doctrines
and for his courage. He promptly took measures in support of Protestantism
and limiting the power of bishops. He requested from Luther teachers to
help him in the work of reformation. Eventually, the entire Danish church
subscribed to the Confession of Augsburg.
    Meanwhile, events in Sweden were following a similar course. When
Christian II sought to impose his authority on that country, among his
prisoners was a young Swede by the name of Gustavus Erikson, better
known as Gustavus Vasa. The young man escaped and, from his refuge
overseas, sought to curb the power of Christian. When he learned of the
Massacre of Stockholm, in which several of his relatives were killed, he
secretly returned to his homeland. Working as a journeyman, and living
among the people, he confirmed the popular sentiment against Danish
occupation. He then proclaimed a national rebellion, and took up arms with
a disorganized band of followers from among the common people. As
victory followed victory, and one daring feat of arms followed another, his
name became legendary. In 1521, the rebels named him regent of the
kingdom, and, two years later, king. A few months after this last
proclamation, he entered Stockholm in triumph, and there he was received
with shouts of acclamation.
    But the royal title carried little authority, for the nobility and the prelates
insisted on their ancient privileges. The new king followed a subtle policy
of dividing his enemies. At first his harsher measures were directed against
the bishops. In every case, he distinguished between the powerful who
incited rebellion and their followers. When two rebellious bishops were
defeated, captured, and condemned to death, the king pardoned all their
followers, declaring that they had been misguided. Thus, he drove a wedge
between clergy and nobility, and between both of these groups and the
majority of the population. The same year as the bishops’ rebellion, he
convened a national assembly that was attended, not only by prelates and
nobles, but also by some from among the bourgeoisie and even the
peasantry. When the clergy and the nobility banded together to thwart the
king’s program of reforms, he simply resigned, declaring that Sweden was
not ready for a true king. Three days later, threatened by chaos, the
assembly agreed to recall the king and to curb the power of the prelates.
    The result of that national assembly, and of Gustavus Vasa’s victory, was
that the higher clergy lost its political power. From that point on, Lutheran
influence was on the rise, and Protestant beliefs were usually joined to
royalist convictions. Gustavus Vasa was not a man of profound religious
conviction. But by the time he died, in 1560, Sweden was a Protestant
country, with a Lutheran ecclesiastical hierarchy, and the monarchy had
ceased to be elective in order to become hereditary.
                                      10

     The Reformation in the Low Countries


     Let it be known that each of us has two arms, and that if hunger
     makes it necessary we shall eat one to have the strength to fight with
     the other.
                            A PROTESTANT DEFENDER AT THE SIEGE OF LEIDEN



In  the Low Countries, as in the rest of Europe, Protestantism gained
adherents from a very early time. In 1523, in Antwerp, the first two
Protestant martyrs were burned. From that point on, there are clear
indications that Protestantism made headway in various areas. But political
circumstances were such that this advance of Protestantism soon became
involved in the long and bitter struggle for independence.

                     THE POLITICAL SITUATION
Near the mouth of the Rhine River, there was a group of territories jointly
known as the Seventeen Provinces, roughly comprising what are today the
Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg. These various territories were
under the lordship of the house of Hapsburg, and therefore Charles V had
inherited them from his father, Philip the Fair. Since Charles had been born
and raised in the region, he was well-liked by its inhabitants, and under his
rule the Seventeen Provinces grew closer together.
   Such political unity, however, was partly fictitious. Although Charles V
encouraged the development of common institutions, throughout his reign
each territory retained many of its ancient privileges and particular forms of
government. Cultural unity was also lacking, for between the French-
speaking south and the Dutch-speaking north there was an area where
Flemish was the common language. The ecclesiastical situation was even
more complex, for the jurisdiction of the various bishops did not coincide
with political divisions, and some areas were part of bishoprics whose sees
were beyond the borders of the Seventeen Provinces.
    When Charles V, in a ceremony held at Brussels in 1555, placed the
Seventeen Provinces under the rule of his son Philip, he expected the latter
to continue his policies. This was precisely what Philip attempted. But what
his father had begun was not easy to continue. The Seventeen Provinces
regarded Charles as Flemish, and that was indeed the language in which he
always felt most at ease. Philip, on the other hand, had been raised in Spain,
and both his language and his outlook were Spanish. In 1556, having
received from his father the crown of Spain, he became Philip II, and he
made it clear that to him the most important of his possessions was Spain.
The Low Countries were put at the service of Spain and her interests. This
in turn provoked the resentment of leaders in the Seventeen Provinces, who
tenaciously opposed Philip’s efforts to complete the unification of the area,
and to treat it as part of the hereditary possessions of the Spanish crown.

                     PROTESTANT PREACHING
Even before the Protestant Reformation broke out, in the Low Countries
there had been a strong movement of reformation. This was the birthplace
of the Brethren of the Common Life, and of the greatest of humanist
reformers, Erasmus of Rotterdam. One of the characteristic themes of the
Brethren of the Common Life was the need to read Scripture, not only in
Latin, but also in the native language of the people. Therefore, the
Protestant Reformation found in the Low Countries fertile ground for its
preaching.
   Soon Lutheran preachers entered the region, gaining a large number of
converts. Then the Anabaptists, particularly those who followed the
teachings of Melchior Hoffman, made great headway. It is noteworthy that
the leaders of the New Jerusalem in Münster were natives of the Low
Countries. While Münster held, many of their countrymen sought to join
them, but were intercepted and killed by imperial troops. Then there were
several unsuccessful attempts by Anabaptists to gain possession of various
cities in the Seventeen Provinces themselves. Finally, there was a great
influx of Calvinist preachers from Geneva, France, and southern Germany.
Eventually, these Calvinist preachers would be the most successful, and
Calvinism would become the main form of Protestantism in the region.
    Charles V took stern measures against the spread of Protestantism in
these lands. He issued several edicts against Protestantism, and in particular
against Anabaptists. The frequency with which such edicts succeeded one
another is proof of their failure to stem the tide of Protestant teaching and
conversions. Tens of thousands died for their faith. The leaders were
burned, their followers beheaded, and many women were buried alive. But,
in spite of such cruel punishments, Protestantism continued its advance.
There are indications that toward the end of Charles’s reign there was a
growing tide of opposition to his religious policies. But Charles was a
popular ruler, and in any case most of the people were still convinced that
Protestants were heretics who amply deserved their punishment.
    Philip, who had never been popular in the Low Countries, prompted
even greater enmity through a combination of folly, obstinacy, and
hypocrisy. When he decided to return to Spain, and to leave the Provinces
under the regency of his half-sister Margaret of Parma, he sought to
strengthen her authority by quartering Spanish troops in the Low Countries.
Such troops had to be supported by the resources of the land. Friction and
clashes soon developed between the Spanish soldiers and the native
inhabitants of the area, who questioned the need for the presence of foreign
troops. Since there was no war requiring their presence, the only possible
explanation was that Philip doubted the loyalty of his subjects.
    To this was added the appointment of new bishops who were given
inquisitorial powers. Undoubtedly, the church in the Seventeen Provinces
was in need of reorganization; but Philip’s timing and manner were not
wise. Part of the rationale offered for the reorganization of the church was
the need to stamp out heresy. Since the inhabitants of the Low Countries
knew that in Spain the Inquisition had become an instrument of torture in
the hands of royal policy, they feared that the king intended to do the same
in their country.
    Even worse, Philip and the regent paid scant attention to their most loyal
subjects. William, Prince of Orange (who had been a close friend of Charles
V) and the Count of Egmont (who had rendered outstanding military
service) were made members of the Council of State. But they were not
consulted on matters of importance, which were decided by the regent and
her foreign advisors. Most hated of such advisors was Bishop Granvelle,
whom the natives of the Low Countries blamed for every injustice and
humiliation they suffered. After repeated protests, the king recalled
Granvelle. But it soon became apparent that the deposed bishop had done
no more than obey his master’s instructions, and that the offensive policies
and practices had been dictated by the king himself.




           William, Prince of Orange, led the rebellion of the Seventeen Provinces.

   In order to argue their cause, the leaders of the Seventeen Provinces sent
the Count of Egmont to Spain. Philip received him with honors and
promised a radical change in policy. Egmont returned to his homeland,
pleased with the assurances he had received. But he was bitterly
disappointed when he opened before the council the sealed letter Philip had
given him, and it clearly contradicted what the king had promised. At the
same time, Philip sent instructions to Margaret that the decrees of the
Council of Trent against Protestantism be enacted, and that all who opposed
them should be put to death.
    The royal orders caused a great stir. The leaders and magistrates of the
Seventeen Provinces were not ready to execute the vast number of their
fellow citizens for whom the king decreed the death penalty. In response to
Philip’s commands, several hundred leaders of the nobility and the
bourgeoisie joined in a petition to the regent that such policies not be
implemented. Margaret received them, and was showing signs of agitation
when one of her courtiers intervened, telling her that she ought not to heed
nor fear “those beggars.”

                              THE BEGGARS
The moniker captured the imagination of the patriots. Since their oppressors
called them beggars, that was the name they would adopt. The leather bag
of a beggar became the banner of rebellion. Under that symbol the
movement, until then limited to the nobility and the bourgeoisie, took root
among the entire population. The standard of rebellion was flaunted
everywhere, and the authorities were at a loss as to how to respond.
    Before reaching the field of battle, the movement took on religious
overtones. There were frequent outdoor meetings in which Protestantism
and opposition to the authorities were preached under the protection of
armed Beggars. For fear of greater disturbances, the regent’s troops allowed
such meetings. Then there were bands of iconoclasts who invaded churches,
overturned altars, and destroyed images and other symbols of the old
religion. When such a band invaded a church, no one intervened, for many
rejoiced secretly while others marveled that heaven did not destroy those
who committed such sacrilege.
    Finally, the Council of State had to appeal to William of Orange, whose
advice it had frequently chided. With the same loyalty with which he had
served Charles, and risking his life, William intervened. Thanks to his
pleas, and to others who supported him, violence abated, and the
iconoclastic wave ceased. This was accomplished, however, only after the
council suspended the Inquisition and allowed a limited freedom of
worship. On their part, the Beggars promised to refrain from action as long
as the government did not seek to impose the Inquisition and other forms of
oppression.
    But Philip was not a king to be swayed by his subjects’ opposition. He
had declared, with vehement sincerity, that he had no desire to be the “lord
of heretics.” The old principle that there was no need to keep faith with the
unfaithful applied in this situation. While he promised to abide by the
agreements reached in the Provinces, and to pardon the rebels, he was
raising an army with which to force his will and faith on the Low Countries.
William of Orange, who was aware of the king’s duplicity, advised his
friends, particularly the counts of Egmont and Horn, to join in armed
resistance. But they put their trust in the king’s promises, and William
withdrew to his possessions in Germany.
    The storm arrived swiftly. Early in 1567, the duke of Alba invaded the
country with an army of Spanish and Italian troops. The king had given him
such powers that the regent became a figurehead, and Alba was the true
ruler. His mission was to drown all rebellion and heresy in blood. One of
his first steps was to organize a Council of Disturbances, which the people
soon dubbed the “Council of Blood.” This court was not bound by any legal
requirements for, as Alba explained to Philip, legality would allow only for
the conviction of those whose crimes were proven, whereas in this case
“matters of state” demanded more drastic measures. Protestants were
condemned for their heresy, and Catholics for not having been sufficiently
firm in resisting heresy. Even to express doubt as to the authority of the
Council of Disturbances was high treason. The same charge of high treason
was brought against any who had opposed the reorganization of the church,
or who had declared that the provinces had rights and privileges that the
king could not overturn. So numerous were those put to death under such
ordinances that chroniclers of the time speak of the stench in the air, and of
hundreds of bodies hanging from trees along the wayside. The counts of
Egmont and Horn, who had remained in their lands with candid trust and
loyalty, were arrested and brought to trial. Since William of Orange was not
available, Alba captured his fifteen-year-old son, Philip William, and sent
him to Spain. William responded by investing all his financial resources in
raising an army, mostly German, with which he invaded the Low Countries.
But Alba defeated him repeatedly and, in retaliation, ordered the execution
of Egmont and Horn.
    Alba seemed to be in full command of the situation when the rebels
received support from an unexpected quarter. Orange had granted privateer
licenses to a few sailors, in the hope that they would harass Alba’s
communications with Spain. These Beggars of the Sea, at first little more
than pirates, achieved a measure of organization, and Philip’s naval forces
could not contain them. For some time, Elizabeth of England gave them
support, most significantly by allowing them to sell their prizes in English
ports. Eventually, Spain pressured her to change this policy. But by then the
Beggars of the Sea were too strong to be easily suppressed. In a brilliant
maneuver, they captured the city of Brill and, after that, their ongoing
success made them a legend and inspired the patriots who resisted on land.
Several cities declared themselves in favor of William of Orange, who once
again invaded the provinces, this time with French support. But the French
also were dealing in treachery, and William was approaching Brussels when
he learned of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Day—to which we shall
return in the next chapter—and this put an end to all possible collaboration
between Protestants and the French crown. Lacking in funds and in any
form of military support, William was forced to disband his troops, who
were mostly mercenary soldiers.
    Alba’s vengeance was terrible. His armies took city after city, and
repeatedly broke the terms of surrender. Prisoners were killed for no other
reason than revenge, and several cities that had resisted were put to the
torch. Women, children, and the elderly were indiscriminately killed along
with the rebels. Soon every rebel stronghold was in Alba’s hands.
    It was only on the sea that the rebels remained strong. The Beggars
continually defeated the Spanish, and even captured their admiral. This in
turn made it very difficult for Alba to receive supplies and funds for his
troops, who therefore began showing signs of mutiny. Tired of the long
struggle, and bitter because Spain did not send him the resources he
required, Alba asked to be appointed elsewhere.
    The new Spanish general, Luis de Zúñiga y Requesens, had the wisdom
to exploit the religious differences among the rebels. He sought a separate
peace with the Catholics of the southern provinces, thus driving a wedge
between them and the Protestants, who were most numerous in the north.
Up until that point, the religious question had been only one element among
many in what was really a national rebellion against foreign rule. William
of Orange, the leader of the uprising, had been a liberal Catholic at least
until his exile in Germany, and it was only in 1573 that he declared himself
a Calvinist. But Requesens’s policies underscored the religious element of
the struggle, thus neutralizing the Catholic provinces of the south.
    The Protestant cause was therefore desperate while its armies were
repeatedly and roundly defeated. Its only hope seemed to be in the Beggars
of the Sea. The crisis came at the Siege of Leiden, an important trading
center that had declared itself for Protestantism, and which the Spanish had
surrounded. An army sent by William of Orange to break the siege was
defeated by the Spanish, and in that battle two of William’s brothers were
killed. All was lost when William, whose enemies called him William the
Silent or the Sly, suggested that the dikes be opened, thus flooding the land
around Leiden. This implied the destruction of many years of hard work,
and the loss of a great deal of arable land. But the citizens agreed. In spite
of an incredible shortage of food, the besieged continued their resistance
during the four months that it took the sea to reach Leiden. Riding in on the
flood, the Beggars of the Sea also arrived, shouting that they would rather
be Turkish than Popish. Lacking naval support, the Spanish were forced to
abandon the siege.
    At that moment, Requesens died. His troops, having neither chief nor
pay, mutinied, and set about sacking the cities of the south, which were
easier prey than those of the north. This served to reunite the inhabitants of
the Seventeen Provinces, who, in 1576, agreed to the Pacification of Ghent.
This was an alliance among the various provinces, making it clear that what
was at stake was national freedom and not religious differences. This
agreement was hailed by William of Orange, who had repeatedly argued
that religious dogmatism and sectarian intolerance were an obstacle to the
unity and freedom of the provinces.
    The next governor was Don Juan de Austria, an illegitimate son of
Charles V, and therefore a half-brother of Philip II. Although he was one of
the most admired military heroes in Christendom, for his defeat of the
Turks at the Battle of Lepanto, he was not allowed to enter Brussels until he
had agreed to the stipulations of the Pacification of Ghent. But Philip II
would not give up the struggle. A new army was sent into the region, and
once again the southern provinces abandoned the struggle. Then the
northern provinces, against the advice of William of Orange, formed a
separate league for the defense of their faith and freedom.
    The struggle dragged on for years. Though masters of the southern
provinces, the Spanish could not conquer those of the north. In 1580, Philip
Il issued a proclamation promising a reward of twenty-five thousand
crowns and a title of nobility to anyone who would kill William the Silent.
The latter and his followers responded with a formal declaration that they
were independent of all royal authority. But three years later, after several
unsuccessful attempts by other parties, an assassin on a quest for the reward
was able to kill William. (Once again, Philip proved untrue to his word, at
first refusing to pay any reward and then paying only a portion of it.) Philip
had hoped that William’s death would put an end to the rebellion. But
William’s son Maurice, then only nineteen years old, proved to be a better
general than his father, and led his troops in several victorious campaigns.
    In 1607, almost a decade after the death of Philip II, Spain decided that
her losses in this struggle were not worth the effort and cost of continuing
the war, and a truce was signed. By then, the vast majority of the population
in the northern provinces was Calvinist, and many in the north equated their
Calvinist faith with their nationalist loyalty, while the southern provinces
remained Catholic. Eventually, religious, economic, and cultural differences
would lead to the formation of three countries, one Protestant—the
Netherlands—and two Catholic—Belgium and Luxembourg.
                                    11

                Protestantism in France


   O Lord, we cry to you: Will you allow such crimes to be committed
   at the expense of your honor?


ETIENNE DE MAISONFLEUR

At the dawn of the sixteenth century, no other nation in Western Europe
had achieved the degree of national unity and centralization that France had
attained. Yet, during the course of that century, few nations were also as
bitterly divided. This was due to the continuing conflict between Protestants
and Catholics, which in France led to long, internecine warfare.

                      SHIFTING ROYAL POLICIES
At the beginning of the reformation, France was ruled by Francis I, the last
great king of the house of Valois. His religious policy was always
ambiguous and hesitant, for he had no desire to see Protestantism enter his
territories and divide them, but he encouraged its spread in Germany, where
it was a thorn in the flesh of his rival Charles V. Thus, although Francis
never lent his support to French Protestants, his attitude toward them varied
according to the dictates of political expediency. When he sought closer ties
with the German Protestants in order to weaken Charles V, he was
constrained to allow a measure of freedom to those in his own lands who
were of the same persuasion. But, at other times, Protestants were
persecuted as vigorously as they were in other Catholic countries. In spite
of such fluctuations, Protestantism gained many adherents in France,
particularly among the learned and the nobility. Those very fluctuations,
granting periods of respite followed by severe persecution, led many French
Protestants into exile—John Calvin among them. From neighboring cities
such as Geneva and Strasbourg, these exiles followed events in their
homeland, and were ready to intervene whenever possible.




Catherine de Medici was the dominant figure in France during the reign of her three sons, Francis II,
                                   Charles IX, and Henry III.

   Meanwhile, in the neighboring kingdom of Navarre—between France
and Spain—Francis’s sister Margaret of Angouleme, who was married to
King Henry of Navarre, encouraged the reform movement. She was a
scholarly woman who had supported the French humanist reformers while
she was still living in France. Now she offered sanctuary in her court to
French Protestant exiles who were fleeing her brother’s territories. From
Navarre, and from cities just across the French border such as Strasbourg
and Geneva, Protestant books were constantly smuggled into France. But in
spite of this, there is no record of Protestant churches in France until much
later, in 1555.
    Francis I died in 1547, and was succeeded by his son Henry II, who
continued his father’s policies, although his opposition to Protestantism was
more constant and cruel. In spite of persecution, it was during Henry’s reign
that the first Protestant church, was formally organized, following the rules
set forth by the exiled John Calvin. Four years later, when the first national
synod gathered, there were churches scattered throughout the nation. That
assembly, meeting secretly near Paris, approved a Confession of Faith and a
Discipline for the new church.
    Shortly after that gathering, Henry II died of wounds received during a
tournament. He left four sons, three of whom would successively inherit the
throne—Francis II, Charles IX, and Henry III—and three daughters, among
them Margaret of Valois, who would be queen of France after her brothers’
death. Their mother was Catherine de Medici, an ambitious woman who
sought to rule through her children.
    Catherine’s projects, however, were hindered by the leaders of the house
of Guise. That family, from Lorraine, had become prominent during the
reign of Francis I. Francis of Guise and his brother Charles, cardinal of
Lorraine, had been the main advisors of Henry II. And now, since young
Francis II was not interested in matters of state, these two brothers ruled in
his name, but their power was resented by the older nobility, and
particularly by the Princes of the Blood, that is, the king’s closest relatives.
    Among these Princes of the Blood were Antoine de Bourbon and his
brother Louis de Condé. The former had married Jane d’Albret, a daughter
of Margaret of Navarre who had followed her mother’s religious
inclinations and become a Calvinist. Her husband, Antoine, and her brother-
in-law Louis then accepted her religion, and thus Protestantism made
headway among the highest nobility of the kingdom. Since the house of
Guise was staunchly Catholic, and sought to stamp out Protestantism, their
struggle with the Bourbons soon took religious overtones. Then a plot was
discovered, the Conspiracy of Amboise, whose goal was to take possession
of the king and separate him from the Guises. Although the plot was not
strictly religious in motivation, most of the conspirators were Huguenots—a
name of uncertain origin given to French Protestants. Among those
implicated, and imprisoned by the Guises, was Louis de Condé. This in turn
caused grave misgivings among the nobility, both Catholic and Protestant,
who feared that the imprisonment, trial, and conviction of a Prince of the
Blood would be a severe blow to their ancient privileges.
    At that point Francis II died unexpectedly. Catherine de Medici quickly
intervened and took the title of regent for her ten-year-old son, Charles IX.
Since she had been repeatedly humiliated and thwarted by the Guises, one
of her first actions was to free Condé and join the Huguenots in their efforts
to limit the power of the house of Lorraine—as the Guises were also called.
By that time, Protestants in France were numerous; there were some two
thousand Huguenot churches. Therefore, for reasons of policy rather than
conviction, Catherine cultivated the Protestants. Those who were in prison
were freed, with a mild admonition to abandon heresy. She then convened a
colloquy of Protestant and Catholic theologians that gathered at Poissy in
order to seek an agreement. This failed, as was to be expected. But in 1562
the regent issued the Edict of St. Germain, which granted Huguenots
freedom to practice their religion, but forbade their owning places of
worship, gathering in synods without a previous permit, collecting funds,
supporting an army, and so on. Thus, all that the Huguenots were granted
was the right to gather for worship, as long as this took place outside cities,
at daytime, and without arms. Catherine hoped by these measures to gain
the favor of Protestants, while limiting any political or military power they
might have. She wished to make the Huguenots a threat to the house of
Lorraine, but not to the unity of the nation or the power of the throne.
    The Guises refused to obey this edict, hoping thus to undermine
Catherine’s authority. Slightly more than two months after the proclamation
of the edict, the two Guise brothers, with two hundred armed noblemen,
surrounded the stable where a group of Huguenots were worshiping in the
village of Vassy, and slew as many as they could.
    The Massacre of Vassy resulted in the first of a long series of religious
wars that ravaged France. Protestant mobs attacked Catholic Churches,
overturning their altars and their images, and sometimes attacking priests
and monks. Catholic mobs, sometimes led by priests, ransacked the
churches and homes of Protestants, whom they often slaughtered. After
several skirmishes, each side raised an army and took the field—the
Catholics under the leadership of the duke of Guise, and the Protestants
under Admiral Gaspard de Coligny. The Catholics won the majority of the
battles, but their general was assassinated by a Protestant nobleman; and
exactly a year after the Massacre of Vassy the two sides agreed to a truce
that granted the Huguenots a measure of tolerance. But this was not a
lasting peace, for there were two other religious wars between 1567 and
1570.

          THE MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW’S DAY
After prolonged wars, the peace of 1570 offered the promise of lasting
peace. Catherine de Medici seemed willing to make concessions to the
Protestants, hoping they would help her in her power struggle against the
Guises. In 1571, Coligny appeared in court, and he made such a favorable
impression on the young king that the latter called him “my father.” There
were also plans for a marriage between Catherine’s daughter Margaret
Valois and the Protestant prince Henry Bourbon, Antoine’s son. All bode
well for the Huguenots, who after long struggles were now able to appear
freely at court.
   But beneath sweet appearances lurked other intentions. The new duke of
Guise, Henry, was convinced that his father’s death had been ordered by
Coligny, and was eager for revenge. Catherine herself began to fear the
growing influence of the Protestant admiral who had won the king’s trust
and admiration. Thus developed a plot to rid themselves of the admiral—
one of the most upright figures of those turbulent times.
   The main Huguenot leaders had come to Paris for the wedding of Henry
Bourbon, by then king of Navarre, and the French king’s sister Margaret
Valois. The ceremony took place, amid great rejoicing and signs of
reconciliation, on August 18. The Protestant nobles were lulled into
overconfidence by their friendly reception and by the king’s obvious good
will. Then, as Coligny was returning to his lodgings from the Louvre, then
the royal palace, someone shot at him from a building owned by the Guise
family. He lost one finger on his right hand, and his left arm was also
wounded. But the attempt on his life had failed.
   The Huguenot leaders, incensed at such a breach of the king’s
hospitality, demanded justice. Charles IX took the investigation seriously,
and uncovered evidence that the shot had been fired from an arquebus
belonging to the duke of Guise, and that the assassin had fled on a horse
from Catherine’s stables. Some even suspected that the king’s brother,
Henry of Anjou—later Henry III—was part of the conspiracy. The
indignant king banned the Guises from court, while inquiries continued.
    The conspirators then took drastic measures. Apparently Catherine
convinced Charles that there was a vast Huguenot plot to wrest the throne
from him, and that its leader was Coligny. The king, who had never shown
great strength of conviction, believed what he was told, and thus the stage
was set for the massacre of Protestants. The king convened his main
counselors—except those who were Protestant—and on the evening of
August 23 it was decided that they would take drastic measures.
    The following day was St. Bartholomew’s Day, August 24, 1572. With
the approval of both Charles IX and Catherine de Medici, the duke of Guise
met with those in charge of keeping order in Paris and gave them detailed
instructions, including what dwelling each would attack, and who their
victims were to be. He took personal charge of the death of Coligny, who
was still convalescing. The admiral was taken by surprise in his
bedchamber, and his attackers inflicted several wounds. While he was still
alive, he was thrown out the window to the duke who waited below, and it
is said that the duke kicked and killed him. Then his body was horribly
mutilated, and what was left was hanged from the gibbet at Montfaucon.
    Altogether, about two thousand Huguenots met a similar fate. Even at
the royal palace, the Louvre, blood ran down the stairs as some thirty
members of the Bourbon guard were slaughtered. The two Protestant
princes of the blood, Louis de Condé and Henry Bourbon—the latter king
of Navarre and now Charles’s brother-in-law—were dragged before the
French king, where they saved their lives by denying their faith.
    The massacre in Paris signaled the beginning of similar events in the
provinces. The duke of Guise had given orders that Protestant leaders in
every corner of the kingdom were to be killed. A few upright magistrates
refused to obey, declaring that they were neither executioners nor
murderers. But most did obey, and mobs went beyond the duke’s order,
ransacking Protestant homes and killing entire families. The number of
victims reached into the tens of thousands.
 The Massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Day, and the events leading to it, are depicted in this woodcut.
 From the building on the left, a man fires at Coligny. At the top right, Coligny is attacked while in
bed and then thrown out the window. Other scenes of terror appear in the rest of the picture. On the
                       top left, the king is at play while all this takes place.

   The news spread throughout Europe. As has been said, William of
Orange, who was marching on Brussels with an army he had raised with
French support (and who later married one of Coligny’s daughters) felt
compelled to disband his troops and abandon the campaign. In England,
Elizabeth dressed in mourning. Emperor Maximilian II, although a faithful
Catholic, expressed horror at the news. But in Rome and Madrid the
reaction was different. Pope Gregory XIII, while declaring that he deplored
the bloodshed, ordered that a Te Deum—a hymn of Thanksgiving—be sung
in celebration of the occurrences on night of St. Bartholomew, and that the
same be done every year in memory of such glorious deeds. Spanish
chroniclers affirm that Philip II smiled in public for the first time when he
received the news of the massacre, and that he too ordered the singing of a
Te Deum and other celebrations.

                 THE WAR OF THE THREE HENRYS
In spite of the many casualties, Protestantism itself had not been stamped
out. Lacking in military leaders as a result of the massacre, the Huguenots
made themselves strong in La Rochelle and Montauban, cities that had been
granted to them by an earlier peace treaty. They declared themselves ready
to fight, not only the house of Guise, but also the king himself, whom they
now declared to be a traitor and a murderer. Many Catholics, tired of
internecine warfare and bloodshed, and convinced that a policy of tolerance
was necessary, offered their support. As for Charles IX, it was apparent that
he was unable to rule, and the country lived in near chaos until his death in
1574.
    The crown then passed to his brother Henry of Anjou—Henry III—one
of the authors of the massacre. His mother, Catherine de Medici, had
arranged to have him elected king of Poland, where he now ruled. But when
he received news of his brother’s death he rushed to Paris to claim the
French throne, without even bothering to abdicate the Polish one. Like his
mother, Henry had no other convictions than those necessary to take and
hold power. Therefore, when he decided that it was to his advantage, he
made peace with the Protestant rebels, who were granted freedom of
worship, except in Paris.
    The more belligerent Catholics, led by the duke of Guise, reacted
vigorously. With Spanish support, they declared war on the Huguenots.
Eventually Henry III joined them, and thus began another war of religion—
the eighth in a seemingly endless series—that bled the country and solved
nothing, for the Huguenots were too weak to defeat the Catholics, and the
latter were not strong enough to stamp out Protestantism.
    Then events took an unexpected turn. Since Henry III had no direct heir,
the legal succession to the throne now belonged to Henry Bourbon, king of
Navarre. This prince, who had been a prisoner in Paris after the Massacre of
St. Bartholomew’s Day, had managed to escape in 1576. He then changed
his religion for a fourth time—and not the last—declaring himself a
Protestant. Although the Huguenots did not find his licentiousness (and that
of his wife) to their liking, he had become the center of Protestant
resistance. Therefore, as conditions now stood, the legal heir to the crown
was a Protestant.
    This the Catholic party could not tolerate, and therefore they put forward
Henry of Guise as the rightful heir to the throne. A document was
supposedly unearthed in Lorraine, showing that the house of Guise was
descended from Charlemagne, and that therefore its right to the crown
superseded the claims of the Bourbons and even of the Valois, whose last
king was Henry III.
    Thus three parties resulted, each headed by a different Henry. The
legitimate king, Henry III, was the least worthy and able of the three. The
Catholic pretender, Henry of Guise, based his claims on a document that
was clearly spurious. The Protestant chief, Henry Bourbon, did not claim
the throne itself but only his right to inherit it.
    The war dragged on until Henry of Guise took Paris and had himself
proclaimed king. Then Henry III had recourse to the same methods Henry
of Guise had earlier employed against the Protestants. Two days before
Christmas 1588, by the king’s order, Henry of Guise was murdered at the
same place where sixteen years earlier he had issued instructions for the
Massacre of St. Barthlomew’s Day.
    This did not put an end to Catholic opposition, however. Very few were
ready to trust a king who had repeatedly made use of political assassination.
The Catholic rebels simply found new leaders and continued fighting. Soon
the king’s situation was desperate, and he had no alternative but to flee from
Paris and seek refuge in the camp of his erstwhile rival, Henry Bourbon,
who at least acknowledged him as the legitimate king.
    Henry Bourbon received the king with due respect and granted him
asylum, but would not let him determine the policies to be followed. This
awkward situation, however, did not last long, for a fanatical Dominican
friar, convinced that the king was a tyrant and that in such circumstances
regicide was licit, entered the Protestant camp, and killed the king.
    The death of Henry III did not end the war. Henry Bourbon, who was
now clearly the legitimate heir, took the name of Henry IV. But French
Catholics were not ready to have a Protestant king. In Spain, Philip II was
planning to seize the opportunity to make himself master of France. The
pope declared that Henry Bourbon’s claim to the throne was not valid. For
these reasons, the war continued for four more years. Finally, Henry IV
decided that the throne would never be his unless he became a Catholic, and
therefore once again he changed his religion. Although he probably never
said the words attributed to him, “Paris is well worth a mass,” they clearly
express his sentiments. The year after this fifth conversion, the new king
entered Paris, and ended several decades of religious wars.
   A service in the Calvinist church in Lyons, in 1564, shows the centrality of the pulpit and of
                               preaching in the Reformed tradition.

   Although he had become a Catholic, Henry IV did not forget his former
comrades in arms. On the contrary, he showed them such loyalty and favor
that the more recalcitrant Catholics claimed that he was still a heretic.
Finally, on April 13, 1598, he issued the Edict of Nantes, granting the
Huguenots freedom of worship in all places where they had had churches
by the previous year, except in Paris. He also guaranteed their security by
granting them all the fortified towns they had held in 1597.
   In spite of his inconstant religious convictions and the licentiousness of
his personal life, Henry IV ruled the nation wisely. During his reign the
country prospered, and soon he was respected by many of his former foes.
But religious hatred and prejudice had not entirely disappeared, and Henry
himself fell victim to them in 1610, when his life was ended by a Catholic
fanatic who was convinced that the king was still a Protestant heretic, and
that God would be served by his death.
                               12

           The Catholic Reformation


On the Cross there hangs the Lord
   of Heaven and earth
   And amid the stress of war
   Peace comes to birth.
                                          ST. TERESA (TR. E. ALLISON PEERS)



The Protestant movement did not encompass all the strong and varied
currents of reformation that were sweeping Europe. Well before Luther’s
protest, there were many who longed for an ecclesiastical reformation, and
who worked toward it. This was particularly true in Spain where, under
Queen Isabella and Cardinal Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros, the Catholic
Reformation was well under way when Luther was still a young boy.

          THE REFORMATION OF SPANISH CATHOLICISM
When Isabella inherited the crown of Castile in 1474, the church in her land
was in urgent need of reformation. As in the rest of Europe, many prelates
were also great lords, more given to war and intrigue than to the spiritual
welfare of the faithful. Most of the lower clergy were insufficiently trained,
to the point that many were able to do no more than recite the mass. As in
other parts of Europe, monasticism was at low ebb, and some of the larger
convents and monasteries had become fashionable places of retreat for the
illegitimate children of royalty and nobility.
    Isabella was determined to reform the church, and to that end began by
securing from the papacy the right to name those who were to fill high
ecclesiastical posts. Her husband Ferdinand, the king of neighboring
Aragon, obtained similar rights for his territories. But their motivations
were very different. Isabella was interested in having the authority to reform
the church, whereas Ferdinand saw in the naming of prelates an important
political prerogative that would strengthen the crown. Thus, while Isabella
was energetically seeking the best candidates to fill vacant posts, Ferdinand
filled the vacant archbishopric of Saragossa, his capital, by naming to that
post his illegitimate son, who was then six years old.
    If Isabella found no support for her program of reformation in her
husband Ferdinand, the same was not true of her confessor, Francisco
Jiménez de Cisneros. He was an austere Franciscan who had spent ten years
in prison for refusing to participate in the corrupt practices of his time.
While in prison, he had studied Hebrew and Chaldean, for he was imbued
with the scholarly interests of the humanists. Finally, through the
recommendation of the reformist bishop of Toledo—who had been chosen
by Isabella—he was made confessor to the queen. When the archbishop
died, Isabella took the steps necessary to have Jiménez named to the vacant
see, the most important in the kingdom. Jiménez refused, and the queen
obtained from Pope Alexander VI—who was anything but a reformer—a
papal bull ordering the reluctant friar to accept.




Isabella, the great queen of Castile, was a champion of reformation long before Luther’s protest. Her
            program did not include the reformation of doctrine, however, as did Luther’s.

   The queen and the archbishop set about the reformation of convents and
monasteries. They personally visited the most important monastic houses,
and those best known for their laxity, calling all to renewed obedience to
their monastic vows, reproving those who showed little improvement, and,
in some cases, severely punishing those who resisted their entreaties.
Protests were sent to Rome. But the pope, while not a reformer, was a
politician who understood the need to humor the reformist queen. As a
result, her hand was further strengthened, and even the most corrupt among
the prelates of her kingdom had to take steps to reform the church.
    Jiménez’s scholarship, most particularly his great interest in Scripture,
was an important element in Isabella’s program of reformation. She was
convinced that both the church and her kingdom were in need of learned
leadership, and therefore encouraged studies. She herself was a scholar, and
surrounded herself with an impressive array of intellectual men and women.
With Ferdinand’s support, she encouraged the printing of books, and soon
there were printing presses in all the major cities of their kingdoms. In all
these projects, Jiménez was an important ally. But his two most significant
contributions were the founding of the University of Alcala and the
publication of the Complutensian Polyglot. The University of Alcala, a few
miles from Madrid, soon counted among its alumni several of the most
prominent figures in Spanish religious and literary life—Cervantes and
Loyola among them. The Complutensian Polyglot—named after
Complutum, the Latin name for Alcala—was a great multilingual edition of
the Bible prepared by the best scholars available: three converts from
Judaism prepared the Hebrew text, a Cretan and two Spanish scholars were
chiefly responsible for the Greek, and the best Latin scholars in Spain
worked on the text of the Vulgate. All these appeared in parallel columns,
and the entire work comprised six volumes (the Old Testament in four, the
New in the fifth, and a thorough discussion of Hebrew, Chaldean, and
Greek grammar in the sixth). Although the work was finished in 1517, it
was not officially published until 1520. It is said that when the work was
completed, Jiménez rejoiced over “this edition of the Bible that, at this
critical time, opens the sacred sources of our religion, from which will flow
a much purer theology than any derived from less direct sources.” Such a
clear affirmation of the superiority of Scripture over tradition, had it been
made a few years later, would have led to accusations of “Lutheran heresy.”
    The scholarly interests of Jiménez and Isabella, however, did not lead to
tolerance. Studies were to be encouraged as long as they contributed to the
reformation of customs and morals, but doctrinal deviation would be
severely punished. Thus, Cardinal Jiménez, the scholar who directed the
Complutensián Polyglot, the patron of books and learning, the reformer of
the life of the church, was also the grand inquisitor who would brook no
diversity or doctrinal deviation. In this he was typical of most of the
Catholic Reformation, which sought to purify the church through austerity,
devotion, and scholarship, but at the same time insisted on strict adherence
to traditional dogma. Most of the saints and sages of the Catholic
Reformation, like Isabella, were pure, devout, and intolerant.

               POLEMICS AGAINST PROTESTANTISM
Although the Catholic Reformation had begun earlier, the advent of
Protestantism gave it a new character. It was no longer a matter of the need
to reform the church out of an inner necessity, but also an attempt to
respond to those who included doctrine among the things to be reformed.
Especially in those regions where Protestantism was a real threat, Catholic
reformers felt compelled to respond with both a reformation of custom and
a defense of traditional doctrine.




     James Latomus was one of many Catholic scholars who opposed Luther and his views.

   Some of these Catholic leaders were scholars, while others feared that
the humanist program posed as great a threat as Protestantism. John Eck,
the theologian who debated Luther and Karlstadt at Leipzig, was also a
conscientious pastor and a scholar who in 1537 published his own German
translation of the Bible. On the other hand, James Latomus, rector of the
University of Louvain, attacked both Protestants and humanists, arguing
that in order to understand Scripture it sufficed only to read it in Latin, in
the light of the tradition of the church, and that the study of Greek and
Hebrew was useless. Eventually, however, it became clear that scholarship
was necessary to refute Protestant teachings; and thus appeared a host of
theologians and scholars who devoted their efforts to counter Protestant
arguments. Foremost among these were Robert Bellarmine and Caesar
Baronius.
   Bellarmine was the main systematizer of Catholic theological arguments
against Protestant claims. For twelve years, beginning in 1576, he held in
Rome the newly founded Chair of Polemics, and toward the end of his
tenure there he began publishing his great work, On the Controversies of
the Christian Faith, which he completed in 1593. This became the classical
source of arguments against Protestantism. In fact, to this day most of the
arguments used by conservative Catholics in their polemics against
Protestantism are drawn from Bellarmine’s work. Bellarmine was also one
of the participants in the trial of Galileo, which concluded that the notion
that the earth moves around the sun is heretical.




    Robert Bellarmine provided what would become the primary Catholic arguments against
                                Protestantism for centuries.
   Caesar Baronius, on the other hand, was a great Catholic historian. A
group of scholars at the University of Magdeburg had begun publishing a
vast history of the church in which they sought to show how Roman
Catholicism had deviated from original Christianity. Since this work—
never completed—devoted a volume to each century, it became generally
known as The Centuries of Magdeburg. In answer to them, Baronius wrote
his Ecclesiastical Annals. It was not until late in the seventeenth century,
with the publication in 1696 of Gottfried Arnold’s True Picture of the First
Christians, and, in 1699, of his Nonpartisan History of the Church and of
Heretics, that an attempt was made at producing a church history that
looked at the past objectively, rather than simply justifying the historian’s
positions—and even then, Arnold’s Pietist inclinations may be seen in the
manner in which he understands the history of the church.

                               NEW ORDERS
Although it is true that monastic life had reached low ebb at the outset of
the Reformation, it is also true that there were still many in convents and
monasteries who took their vows seriously, and who bemoaned the sad state
of monastic life. During the sixteenth century, such longings came to
fruition in the reformation of the old orders, as Isabella and Jiménez had
advocated, and in the founding of new ones. Among these new orders, some
sought to renew the ancient strict observance of monastic vows, whereas
others were shaped to respond to the new conditions of the sixteenth
century. The most noteworthy new order of the first type was that of the
Discalced Carmelites, founded by St. Teresa. Meanwhile, the Jesuits, under
the leadership of Ignatius Loyola, were foremost among the orders that
hoped to respond to the new times with new solutions.
   Teresa spent most of her youth in Avila, an ancient walled city perched
high in the plateaus of Castile. Her grandfather was a converted Jew who
had moved with his family to Avila after having been shamed by the
Inquisition in his native Toledo. She had felt attracted to the monastic life
from an early age, although she later declared that she also feared it. When
she finally joined the Carmelite convent of the Incarnation, just outside
Avila, she did so against her father’s wishes. There, her wit and charm made
her so popular that it became a fad for the aristocracy of the city to visit and
exchange pleasantries with her. But she herself was unhappy with this easy
style of monasticism, and spent as much time as possible reading books of
devotion.




Many students of Teresa’s mysticism believe that the walls of Avila, where she lived, inspired Teresa
                            to think of the soul as an “inner castle.”

   She was dismayed when the Inquisition published a list of forbidden
books that included most of her favorites. She then had a vision in which
Jesus told her: “Fear not, for I shall be to you like an open book.” From
then on, such visions became increasingly frequent. This led her into a
prolonged inner struggle, for she had no way of determining whether the
visions were genuine or, in her words, “it was a demon.” Her confessors,
whom she changed repeatedly, were of little help. One even told her to
exorcise the visions with an obscene sign—a thing she could never bring
herself to do. Finally, with the help of some learned friars, she came to the
conviction that her visions were genuine.
   She then felt called, again by a vision, to leave the convent and found
another one nearby, in order to follow the monastic life with more rigor
there. Overcoming great opposition from the bishop as well as from other
nuns and from the aristocracy of the city, she managed to found her little
convent. But this was not enough, for her visions called her to found similar
houses throughout Spain. Her enemies accused her of being a gadabout. But
she won the respect of bishops and royalty, and eventually the order she
founded spread throughout Spain and its possessions. Since her nuns wore
sandals instead of shoes, they became generally known as the Discalced (or
Barefoot) Carmelites.
   She was joined in her efforts by John of the Cross—later known as St.
John of the Cross—a man so short that, when she met him, St. Teresa is
said to have quipped, “Lord, I asked you for a monk and you sent me half
of one.” The two became close friends and collaborators and, through
John’s work, Teresa’s reform resulted in the male branch of the Discalced
Carmelites. Thus, Teresa is the only woman in the history of the church to
have founded monastic orders for both women and men.




    “Santa Teresa de Jesús” as depicted in Avila by Carmelite sculptor Jesús de Santa Teresa.

    While deeply involved in all the administrative matters related to the
convents she founded, Teresa also spent time in mystical contemplation,
which often led to visions or to ecstasy. Her many works on the subject
have become classics of mystical devotion and, in 1970, Pope Paul VI
added her name to the official list of “Doctors of the Church”—an honor
she shares with one other woman, St. Catherine of Siena, and also with St.
John of the Cross.
    While Teresa’s reformation was directed at the monastic life and the
stricter observance of the ancient rule of the Carmelites, the one led by St.
Ignatius Loyola that had begun a few years earlier, was intended to respond
to the outward challenges the times posed for the church. Ignatius was the
scion of an ancient aristocratic family and had hoped to attain glory through
a military career. These dreams were shattered when, at the siege of
Pamplona in Navarre, he suffered a wound that caused him to limp for the
rest of his life. While still bedridden, and prey to both excruciating pain and
bitter disappointment, he turned to the reading of devotional books. This led
to a vision he later retold, referring to himself in the third person:




                      Monument to St. John of the Cross in Avila.


   Lying awake one night, he clearly saw the image of Our Lady with
   the Holy Child Jesus, and with that vision he received remarkable
   consolation for a long time, and was left with such repugnance for his
   former life, and especially for things of the flesh, that it seemed like
   all the images that had been painted on his soul were erased.5

    Loyola then went on pilgrimage to the hermitage of Montserrat, where,
in a rite reminiscent of the ancient orders of chivalry, he devoted himself to
the service of his Lady, the Virgin, and confessed all his sins. Then he
withdrew to Manresa, where he intended to live as a hermit. But this did not
suffice to calm his spirit, tormented—as Luther’s had been earlier—by a
profound sense of his own sin. His account of those days is strikingly
similar to Luther’s:

   At that point he came to have much travail with scruples, for,
   although the general confession he had made at Montserrat had been
   done with great diligence and in writing, [ . . . ] it still seemed to him
   that there were some things that he had not confessed. And this
   caused him great affliction because, even having confessed those
   other things, he was not at peace.
        Then [ . . . ] the confessor ordered him not to confess anything
   of the past, but only those things that were very clear to him. But to
   him all these things were very clear, and therefore this order was of
   no benefit to him, and he was still in great travail. [ . . . ]
        When he had such thoughts, very often the temptation came to
   him with great force, to jump from a big hole in his room, next to the
   place where he prayed. But then, acknowledging that to kill himself
   would be a sin, he would cry out, “Lord, I shall do naught to offend
   thee.”6

    Such were the torments the future founder of the Jesuits suffered until he
came to know the grace of God. He does not tell how this happened. But he
does say that “from that day on he was free of those scruples, being certain
that our Lord had wished to free him by His mercy.”7
    At this point, however, the parallel between Luther and Loyola diverges,
for while the German friar set out on a path that would eventually lead to an
open break with the Catholic Church, the Spaniard took an opposite tack.
From then on he devoted his life, no longer to the monastic quest for his
own salvation, but now to the service of the church and its mission. Hoping
to become a missionary to the Turks, he first went to the Holy Land, which
for centuries had exerted a mysterious attraction on the European soul. But
the Franciscans who were already working there feared the complications
the fiery Spaniard could create, and forced him to leave. He then decided
that he must learn theology in order to better serve God. By then a mature
man, he studied beside younger students at the universities of Barcelona,
Alcala, Salamanca, and Paris. Soon a small band gathered around him,
drawn by his fervent faith and enthusiasm. Finally, in 1534, he returned to
Montserrat with his small band, and there all made solemn vows of poverty,
chastity, and obedience to the pope.
   The initial purpose of the new order was to work among the Turks in the
Holy Land. But by the time Pope Paul III gave it his formal approval, in
1540, the threat of Protestantism was such that the Society of Jesus—
commonly known as the Jesuits—came to be one of the main instruments
of the Catholic offensive against Protestantism. The Jesuits, however, did
not set aside their original missionary commitment, and soon hundreds of
them were laboring in the Far East and the New World. As a response to
Protestantism, the Society of Jesus was a powerful weapon in the hands of a
reformed papacy. Their organization, patterned after the military, enabled
them to respond rapidly and efficiently to various challenges and
opportunities. Many of them were also scholars who contributed their
knowledge to the polemic against Protestantism.
   St. Ignatius of Loyola was probably the most influential leader in the Catholic Reformation.

                           PAPAL REFORMATION
When Luther nailed his theses on the Wittenberg door, the papacy was in
the hands of Leo X, who was more interested in embellishing the city of
Rome, and in furthering the interests of the house of Medici, than in
religious matters. Therefore, even those who remained loyal Catholics had
little hope that the necessary reformation would come from Rome. While
some called on lay rulers to put the church’s house in order, others revived
the earlier conciliarist ideas, calling for a council to discuss both the issues
posed by Luther and his followers, and to develop a program for putting an
end to corruption and abuse within the church.
     The brief pontificate of Adrian VI offered some hope of reformation. He
was a man of lofty ideals who did indeed wish to reform the church. But the
intrigues of the curia thwarted most of his projects, which in any case were
cut short by his unexpected death. The next pope, Clement VII, was a
cousin of Leo X, and his policies were similar to those of his kinsman.
Although he did succeed in his plans for the beautification of Rome, his
pontificate was disastrous for the Roman church, for it was during his time
that England declared itself independent of papal authority, and the troops
of Charles V sacked Rome. Paul III, who succeeded Clement, remained an
ambiguous figure. He seemed to trust astrology more than theology, and his
papacy, like those of his predecessors, was tainted by nepotism: his son was
made duke of Parma and Piacenza, and his teenage grandsons were made
cardinals. He too wished to make Rome the wealthiest center of
Renaissance art, and for that reason continued the systems of exploitation
whereby the papacy sought to collect funds from all nations in Europe. But
he was also a reforming pope. He was the one who gave official recognition
to the Jesuits and began employing them in missions and in polemics
against Protestantism. In 1536, he appointed a distinguished commission of
cardinals and bishops to report to him on the need and proposed means of
reformation. Their report somehow reached the hands of the enemies of the
papacy, and gave Protestants abundant ammunition for their campaign
against “Popery.” Paul himself, having realized that a significant portion of
his income was derived from practices that his own commission had
declared corrupt, decided that it was best to leave matters as they were. He
did, however, convoke the council for which so many had been clamoring.
It began its sessions at Trent in 1545. The next pope, Julius III, possessed
all the vices of his predecessor, and few of his virtues. Once again nepotism
became the order of the day, and the Roman court became a center of games
and festivities, in imitation of other courts in Europe. Then Marcellus II, a
man with a firm commitment to reformation, became pope. But his sudden
death put an end to his pontificate.
    Finally, in 1555, Cardinal Giampietro Carafa was elected pope, and took
the name of Paul IV. He had been a member of the commission appointed
earlier by Paul III, and as soon as he became pope he set out to correct the
evils that that commission had decried. He was an austere, virtually rigid
man, and he tended to equate the need for reformation with strict uniformity
in all matters. Under his leadership, the activity of the Inquisition increased
to the point of terror; and the Index of Forbidden Books, published under
his direction, included some of the best Catholic literature. But in spite of
this Paul IV deserves credit for having cleansed the Roman curia, and for
having placed the papacy at the head of the Catholic Reformation. In
varying ways and degrees, his was the policy followed by his successors for
several generations.

                        THE COUNCIL OF TRENT
The reader will remember that Luther and several other reformers
repeatedly appealed to a universal council. During the early years of the
Reformation, however, the popes opposed the convocation of such an
assembly, for they feared a rebirth of the conciliarist movement, which had
claimed supremacy over the papacy. Therefore, it was only during the reign
of Paul III, when the breach between Protestants and Catholics became
permanent, that Rome gave serious consideration to the possibility of
calling a universal council. After many difficult and complicated
negotiations, it was decided that the council would meet at Trent in
December 1545. Charles V had insisted that the council meet in his
territories, and that was why they selected Trent, an imperial city in
northern Italy. Even so, it was attended by few prelates—thirty-one in the
first session, and two hundred and thirteen in the last.
    Until then, most of the great councils had dealt with a few problems, or
with a particular doctrine considered heretical. But the issues posed by
Protestantism were of such magnitude, and the church was in such need of
reformation, that the council was not content with condemning
Protestantism. Instead, it felt compelled to discuss every item of theology
that the Protestant Reformation had questioned, and to issue a number of
decrees for the reformation of the church. Linking uniformity with
orthodoxy, the council also took measures regulating the life and worship of
the church.
    The Council of Trent, considered by the Roman Catholic Church the
nineteenth ecumenical council, had a checkered history. When relations
between Pope Paul III and the emperor grew tense, the pope moved the
gathering to the papal states. But the emperor ordered his bishops to remain
at Trent, with the result that the council was suspended in 1547. It was
reconvened in 1551, and suspended again the following year. In 1555, Paul
IV became pope. Although he wished to continue the work of reformation
begun by the council, he feared the excessive influence of the Spaniards in
the assembly, and therefore refrained from reconvening it. Finally, in 1562,
during the pontificate of the next pope, Pius IV, the council gathered again,
completing its work, in 1563. Therefore, although in theory the council
lasted from 1545 to 1563, during most of that time it was in recess.




The Council of Trent, considered by the Roman Catholic Church the nineteenth ecumenical council,
 responded to the various issues raised by the Reformation and set the tone for Roman Catholicism
                                     for the next four centuries.

    The decrees of the Council of Trent are too numerous to list here. As
measures of reformation, it ordered bishops to reside in their sees,
condemned pluralism (the holding of several ecclesiastic offices
simultaneously), listed and defined the obligations of the clergy, regulated
the use of such things as relics and indulgences, and ordered the founding
of seminaries for the training of the ministry (until that time, there had been
no generally accepted regulations or educational requirements for
ordination). It also promoted the study of Thomas Aquinas, making his the
dominant theology in the Catholic Church. On the other hand, it took
measures against Protestantism. In this vein, it declared that the Latin
translation of the Bible, the Vulgate, would be authoritative in matters of
dogma; that tradition has an authority parallel to that of Scripture; that there
are seven sacraments; that the mass is a true sacrifice that can be offered for
the benefit of the deceased; that communion in both kinds—that is, with the
laity receiving both the bread and the wine—is not necessary; that
justification is based on good works done through the collaboration
between grace and the believer; and so forth.
 The debate between Catholics and Protestants forced both to look again at the entire history of the
   church. On the Catholic side, Baronius came to be known as the father of church history. His
             Protestant counterparts were the authors of the Centuries of Magdeburg.

    In spite of its checkered history, of the scant number of prelates who
attended it, and of the resistance of many sovereigns who would not allow
its decrees to be published in their territories, the Council of Trent marked
the birth of the modern Catholic Church. This was not exactly the same as
the medieval church against which Luther protested, for it bore the marks of
a reaction against Protestantism. During the next four centuries, that
reaction would be such that the Roman Church refused to concede that
many of the elements of the Protestant Reformation that the Council of
Trent had rejected did have deep roots in Christian tradition. It would be
much later, in the twentieth century, that the Catholic Church would finally
be able to set its own agenda for reformation apart from a reaction to
Protestantism.
                                     13

               Protestantism at the Edges


   In the name of the Vaudois Churches of the Alps, of Dauphiné, and
   of Piedmont . . . we here promise, our hands on the Bible, and in the
   presence of God, that all our valleys shall courageously sustain each
   other in matters of religion. . . . We promise to maintain the Bible,
   whole and without admixture, according to the usage of the true
   apostolic church, persevering in the holy religion, though it be at
   peril of life.
                                            WALDENSIAN DECLARATION, 1561



During    the sixteenth century, Catholics, Lutherans, Reformed, and
Anglicans, all took for granted that a state must have a single religion to
which all its subjects must adhere. While the Anabaptists—except for
extreme groups such as those who established the New Jerusalem at
Münster—did not hold to this opinion, their very refusal to become a state
religion meant that the tolerance they advocated was seldom granted by any
state. As we have seen in following the story of Lutheranism in Germany,
peace was only attained by deciding that some states would be Lutheran
and some Catholic—once again, the principle of cujus regis eius religio.
The tragic story of the wars of religion in France, and of their aftermath, is a
prime example of the consequences of the notion that a state could have but
one religion. Even the Edict of Nantes, whereby those wars ended,
guaranteed the survival of Protestantism by granting it a number of cities
that would be Protestant, while the rest of the nation would remain
Catholic.
    But it is not easy to legislate on matters of religion, and therefore in
every land there were those who disagreed with the faith espoused by the
government. We have already noted the struggles in England and in France,
both of which resulted in dire conditions for those who followed a different
faith than their governments—Catholics in England, and Protestants in
France. While it is impossible to follow the history of the brave souls, both
Catholic and Protestant, who remained firm in their convictions in spite of
governmental pressure and even persecution, the story of Christianity in
sixteenth-century Europe would be incomplete without acknowledging at
least some of their struggles and their contributions.




  The monastery of Santiponce, at the outskirts of Seville, was one of the main centers from which
                                  Protestantism spread in Spain.

                                  SPAIN
Before the outbreak of the Protestant Reformation, there were many who
hoped that Spain would take the lead in the long-overdue reformation of the
church. As we have noted, Isabella and Cardinal Jiménez de Cisneros had
implemented a vast program of religious reformation—including the
renewal in biblical studies that took place in connection with the
Complutensian Polyglot Bible. There were also in Spain many humanists—
some of them in high positions—who looked to a reformation such as that
which Erasmus proposed.
    But then, as a result of the Protestant Reformation, things changed. At
the Diet of Worms, an upstart German monk by the name of Martin Luther
had dared confront Emperor Charles V, who was also King Charles I of
Spain, and the house of Austria, became the champion of opposition to
Lutheranism and all that seemed to approach it. The Spanish Inquisition,
previously directed mostly at those accused of “Judaizing” or of witchcraft,
now turned its attention to those whose call for reformation could be
dubbed “Lutheranism.” A number of the leading humanists fled to lands
where they could enjoy greater freedom. Others simply turned to their
literary studies, and let religious matters follow their own course.




  The first edition of Casiodoro de Reina’s translation of the Bible is known as La Biblia del Oso
                  because the illustration on the first page is of a bear eating honey.

   Yet the Inquisition was not able to put a stop to all “Lutheran
contagion.” This was particularly true in Valladolid and Seville, where
repeated autos-da-fe punished those who were convicted of Lutheranism.
Unbeknownst to the officers of the Inquisition, a Jeronimite monastery in
Santiponce, a few miles outside of Seville, became a center of reformation
to which Bibles and Protestant books were smuggled in barrels supposedly
containing oil or wine. When the smuggler was captured and burned, and
word arrived that the Inquisition had wind of the goings-on in the
monastery, twelve of the monks decided to flee, and to meet a year later in
Geneva. Their personal adventures were quite a saga, but eventually they
did meet in Geneva. One of them became pastor of the Spanish-speaking
community in Geneva. Another, Casiodoro de Reina, devoted the rest of his
life to translating the Bible into Spanish, and after many vicissitudes did
publish a translation that has won general praise as a masterpiece of
Spanish literature (1569). Some years later, another of the twelve, Cipriano
de Valera, revised this version, which is now known as the Reina-Valera
Bible. Meanwhile, in their old monastery in Santiponce, as well as
throughout the region of Seville, the Inquisition continued cleansing the
church of all trace of “Lutheranism”—so called by the inquisitors, although
in fact most of them were Calvinists or simply Erasmians who continued
hoping for reformation along humanist lines. Still, studies in the twentieth
century would seem to indicate that the Inquisition was not totally
successful, and that even in Santiponce itself some remnants of the
movement continued existing for some time.

                                   ITALY
In the most inaccessible valleys among the Alps, and in lesser numbers in
other regions of Italy and southern France, the ancient community begun by
Peter Waldo in the twelfth century (see Vol. I, Chapter 32), continued a
secluded and threatened existence. Repeatedly attacked by armies seeking
to suppress their “heresy,” they had long stood firm in their mountain
strongholds, which they successfully defended against all invaders. But by
the early sixteenth century the movement seemed to have lost impetus as
repeated threats and persecutions sought to suppress them. Many of them
felt that the price they paid for disagreeing with Rome was too high, and
increasing numbers were returning to Catholicism.
    Then strange rumors arrived. It was said that in other lands a great
movement of reformation had begun, and that this movement was making
impressive progress. An emissary sent to inquire about these rumors
returned in 1526 declaring that they were indeed true, that in Germany,
Switzerland, France, and even more distant regions, a reformation was
afoot, and that many of the doctrines of the reformers agreed with what the
Waldensians had held for centuries. Further delegations met with some of
the leading reformers—Oecolampadius and Bucer among others—who
received them enthusiastically and affirmed most of their doctrines, while
also suggesting some points at which those doctrines could be brought into
closer accord with Scripture. In 1532, the Waldensians gathered in a synod
representing, as they said, “the pastors and heads of families of the valleys
of Piedmont,” and after some discussion adopted what amounted to the
main tenets of the Protestant Reformation, thus becoming the oldest
Protestant church—existing more that three centuries before the
Reformation itself!
    This did not make things easier for the Waldensians. Their fellow
believers in southern France, whose lands were more vulnerable than the
valleys in the Alps, were invaded and practically exterminated—most of the
survivors fled for refuge in the Alps. Then a series of edicts ensued, first
forbidding attendance at Protestant worship, and then commanding
attendance at mass. Once again, the more accessible regions of the
Piedmont were devastated, and greater numbers of Waldensians sought
refuge in more secluded areas in the Alps. Meanwhile, the Waldensian
communities that had developed earlier in Calabria, in southern Italy, were
exterminated.
    Seeing that the Waldensians in the Alps remained steadfast in their faith,
large armies encouraged and supported by the pope, by the duke of Savoy,
and by other powerful lords repeatedly invaded the area, only to be defeated
and even routed by the defenders. On one occasion, six men with firearms
held back an entire army at a narrow pass while others climbed the
mountains above. When rocks began raining on them, the invading soldiers
panicked, and the entire army was routed. When peace was finally attained
for an extended period, plague broke out decimating the population. The
devastation was such that only two pastors survived. As their replacements
came from outside—mainly from the Reformed areas of Switzerland—
closer ties developed between the Waldensians and the Reformed. Still their
woes would not end, for in 1655 all Waldensians living in what is now
northern Italy were commanded under penalty of death to quit their lands
within three days, selling them to good Catholics and moving to less
desirable places. That same year the Marquis of Pianeza, charged with
exterminating the Waldensians, marched at the head of an army; but,
convinced that were he to invade the Alps his army would suffer the same
fate as all earlier invaders, he then offered peace to the Waldensians. Since
the latter had always insisted that they would make war only to defend
themselves, they now admitted Pianeza’s soldiers into their homes,
providing them food and shelter from the cold, and allowing them to move
into some of the most secluded valleys. Then, two days later, at a
prearranged signal, the supposedly peaceful guests turned on their hosts,
killing men, women and children—a victory which they then celebrated
with a Te Deum.
    Still the Waldensians resisted, and still they believed their enemies
would make peace with them. Louis XIV of France, known among other
things for ordering the expulsion of all Huguenots from France, demanded
that the duke of Savoy do likewise with his Waldensian subjects. Finally,
large numbers of Waldensians abandoned their mountain homes and went to
life in exile in Geneva and other Protestant areas, but others insisted on
remaining on their ancestral lands, where they were constantly menaced by
renewed invasions and violence. It was not until the revolution of 1848, and
the promulgation of the constitution for the kingdom of Piedmont—which
would eventually unify Italy—that the Waldensians and other dissident
groups were finally granted freedom of worship.
    Even then, life would not be easy for the Waldensians. In 1850 famine
broke out. It soon became apparent that their alpine valleys, long
overexploited and now overpopulated, could no longer sustain the
population. After much debate, the first of many Waldensian contingents
left for the recently formed Republic of Uruguay. There—and later in
Argentina—they settled and flourished, taking the leadership in promoting
agricultural innovation. In 1975, the two Waldensian communities, one on
each side of the Atlantic, made it clear that they were still one church by
deciding that they would be governed by a single synod which would
normally hold two sessions, one in the Americas in February, and the other
in Europe in August.
    Although the Waldensian saga has occupied much of our attention here,
theirs was not the only Protestant presence in Italy. Among many others,
Juan de Valdés and Bernardino Ochino deserve special mention. Valdés was
a Spanish Erasmian of Protestant inclinations who was forced to leave
Spain and seek refuge in Italy in 1531, when it became clear that Charles V
was determined to extirpate Protestantism from Spain. Settling in Naples,
he gathered around himself a group of followers and colleagues who
devoted themselves to devotion and to Bible study, who did not seek to
make their views public, and who were fairly moderate in their Protestant
leanings. Among the members of this group was Giulia Gonzaga, a woman
of such fame that at one point in her life the Sultan in Constantinople
sought to have her kidnapped. But it was another member of this group,
Bernardino Ochino, a famous and pious preacher who twice had been
elected general of the Capuchins, who openly embraced and taught
Protestant principles. When threatened by the Inquisition, he fled to
Geneva. From that point on, his life was a series of wanderings, both
geographical and doctrinal. He moved first to Geneva, then to Basel,
Augsburg, Strasbourg, London, and finally Zürich. Doctrinally, he became
ever more radical, eventually rejecting the doctrine of the Trinity and
defending polygamy—for which reason he had to leave Zürich and
continue wandering until he died of the plague in 1564.

                                HUNGARY
At the beginning of the Protestant Reformation, Hungary was ruled by the
rather ineffectual King Louis II, who was ten years old at his accession to
the throne in 1516. In 1526, the Ottoman Turks defeated the Hungarians
and killed their king. The leaders among the Hungarian nobility then
elected Ferdinand of Hapsburg to occupy the vacant throne, but others of
strong nationalist sentiments named Janus II Zapolya (also knows as John
Sigismund) as their king. After complex conflicts and negotiations,
Hungary was partly under Hapsburg, but mostly under Ottoman, rule. As
elsewhere, the Hapsburgs supported Catholicism, and took every possible
measure to prevent what they considered to be the Protestant contagion. But
theirs was only the western edge of Hungary, for the rest of the nation was
ruled by the Ottomans. Transylvania (or Royal Hungary) enjoyed a measure
of autonomy, and eventually King Sigismund, seeing that religious division
weakened the nation, declared, “That is enough theology,” and decided that
four forms of Christianity would have equal standing: Roman Catholicism,
Lutheranism, the Reformed tradition coming from Switzerland, and
Unitarianism—which we shall encounter again as we look at the
Reformation in Poland. However, most of Hungary was occupied by the
Ottomans, whose policy with regard to Christianity was to promote
divisions among Christians, most of the time putting Catholicism at a
disadvantage—until Protestantism grew strong, at which time the policy
was reversed. The pressure on Catholicism was such that in the period
between 1500 and 1606 the number of Franciscans in the land was reduced
from fifteen hundred to thirty.
    Lutheranism reached Hungary at an early date, and had to live under
these conditions. There is evidence that Luther’s ninety-five theses were
circulating in Hungary barely a year after their posting. By 1523, the
Hungarian Diet under Hapsburg rule ordered that Lutherans be burned to
prevent the spread of their nefarious teachings. A few years later, Zwingli’s
teachings entered the scene, and similar measures were taken against them.
Even though Ottoman rule was harsh, and atrocities were committed against
all Christians, it was in the territories occupied by the Ottomans that
Protestantism grew most rapidly. Since Hungarians were suffering under a
highly centralized rule, they preferred the Reformed tradition to the
Lutheran, for the latter seemed too hierarchical, while the Swiss form of
church government, in which pastors and laity shared authority, was closer
to what the Hungarians wanted in both church and civil government. Also,
this decentralized form of government made it more difficult for Ottoman
authorities to exert pressure on the leaders of the church. (While such
pressure was often religiously inspired, it also was a means for corrupt
authorities to extort money from Christians. There are records indicating
that the Ottoman authorities would accept the appointment of a parish priest
on the condition that the congregation promise to pay if the priest was
arrested for any reason. Needless to say, such priests were often arrested,
and were freed only when a bribe was paid.)
    Both the Hapsburgs and the Ottomans took measures to prevent the
spread of unwanted teachings by means of the printing press. Already in
1483—long before the Reformation—the sultan had issued a decree
condemning printers to having their hands cut off. Now Ferdinand I issued
a similar ruling against unauthorized printers—except that, instead of
having their hands amputated, they were to be drowned! Even so, Protestant
books circulated, often produced in clandestine presses that were constantly
moving from place to place, and sometimes smuggled in barrels purporting
to hold merchandise—much as was being done at the same time in Spain.
One result of this was the proliferation of publications in the vernacular,
culminating in the publication of the Karoly Bible in 1590 and the Vizsoly
Bible in 1607, which played in Hungarian a role similar to that of Luther’s
Bible in German. It was estimated that by 1600 as many as four out of five
Hungarians were Protestant.
   Then conditions changed. Early in the seventeenth century, Ottoman
power was waning, and Transylvania, supported by Hungarian nationalist
sentiments, clashed with the Hapsburgs. At first Transylvania gained the
upper hand, and the conflict was settled by the treaty of Vienna, which
granted equal rights to both Catholics and Protestants. But then the Thirty
Years’ War—in which Transylvania opposed the Hapsburgs and their allies
—brought greater devastation to the country. Even after the end of the
Thirty Years’ War, the tripartite conflict among the Hapsburgs, Royal
Hungary and the Ottomans continued. In the end, the Hapsburgs gained the
upper hand, and the peace of Karlowitz in 1699 gave them control over
practically all of Hungary—a control they retained until 1918. In Hungary,
as elsewhere, the Hapsburgs imposed strong anti-Protestant measures, and
eventually the country became predominantly Catholic; but still the
Reformed Church of Hungary had a strong and continued presence in the
country—as did also the Socinian Unitarians.

                                 POLAND
At the time when Luther posted his ninety-five theses, there was already in
western Poland a growing number of Hussites who had fled difficult
circumstances in Bohemia. Then Luther’s writings and teachings made their
way into Poland, brought mostly by students from Wittenberg. The Poles,
however, had long been in conflict with the Germans, and distrusted
anything coming from such a source. For that reason, although Lutheranism
did spread, its growth was relatively slow. It was when Calvinism made its
way into the country that Protestantism began making headway, for here
was a form of Protestantism that was not tainted by German origins. The
king at the time was Sigismund I (1501–1548), who strongly opposed all
Protestant doctrine. But by the middle of the century Calvinism enjoyed a
measure of support from King Sigismund II (1548–1572), who even
corresponded with Calvin.
    The leader of the Calvinist movement in Poland, Jan Laski (or Johannes
a Lasco, 1499–1560), was a nobleman who maintained correspondence
with a wide circle with people of reforming inclinations, including
Melanchthon and Erasmus—whose library he purchased. Temporarily
exiled from Poland for his Calvinist inclinations, he was called back by
some among the nobility who favored Calvinism. Besides gaining converts
to Calvinism, Laski translated the Bible into Polish, and worked for a
rapprochement between Calvinists and Lutherans—an effort that
culminated in a consensus at the synod of Sendomir in 1570, ten years after
Laski’s death.
    In general, the Polish government followed a policy of greater religious
tolerance than most of Europe. As a result, a large number of people—
mostly Jews and Christians of heterodox persuasions—sought refuge there.
Among these was Faustus Socinius (1539–1604), whose uncle Laelius
Socinius (1525–1562) had run afoul of several leaders in the Protestant
Reformation for his anti-Trinitarian doctrines. Faustus Socinius embraced
his uncle’s teachings, denying the essential divinity of Jesus, and eventually
sought refuge first in Transylvania and then (1579) in Poland, where he
joined others who shared his convictions in denying the doctrine of the
Trinity—hence the name of Unitarians. His views were expressed and
defended in the Racovian Catechism, written by two of his followers and
published in 1605. This document, greatly admired among Unitarians,
affirms and argues that only the Father is God, that Jesus is not divine, but
purely human, and that the Holy Spirit is just a way of referring to God’s
power and presence.
    Throughout most of the sixteenth century, and well into the seventeenth,
the Protestant faith as affirmed at the Synod of Sendomir had a growing
number of followers—as did also Socinian Unitarianism. But as the
national identity of Poland developed in contradistinction and opposition to
Russian Orthodox to their east, and the German Lutherans to their west, and
as both Russia and Germany repeatedly sought to occupy Polish territory,
that identity became increasingly Roman Catholic, so that by the twentieth
century Poland was one of the most Catholic nations in Europe.
    The brief survey of these four nations at the edge of the Protestant
Reformation should suffice to show that Protestantism made a significant
impact, not only in those countries that became Protestant, but also in the
rest of Europe. Furthermore, one may also conclude that this was also true
for Eastern Orthodoxy, for—as we shall see in Chapter 30—in 1629 the
patriarch of Constantinople, Cyril Lukaris, published a Protestant
Confession of Faith, and early in the eighteenth century Feofan Prokopovic
(1681–1736), Russian Orthodox archbishop of Novgorod, argued that the
Russian Orthodoxy would profit from Protestant influences.
                                    14

                      A Convulsed Age


   A mighty fortress is our God,
   A bulwark never failing;
   Our helper He amidst the flood
   Of mortal ills prevailing.


MARTIN LUTHER

The    sixteenth century was a pivotal period in the entire history of
Christianity. The turning points had been set in motion in the previous
century, with the Fall of Constantinople to the Turks in 1453 and the
“discovery” of America in 1492. Until that time, Christianity had been
generally hemmed in by Muslims to the south and east—with the notable
exception of Russian Christianity, which continued to expand eastward as
the power of the czars also expanded—and by the Atlantic Ocean to the
west. When Christians thought of the world-wide mission of the church,
they thought almost exclusively in terms of the conversion of Muslims. And
when they thought of challenges to the faith, this too they did in terms of
the challenges of Islam. This world view seemed to be corroborated by the
Fall of Constantinople and the advance of Turkish power, which seemed the
greatest menace to the survival of Christianity itself.
    Yet in the course of a century, things changed radically. Toward the east
and south, the challenge of Islam was seemingly countered by the
completion of the Spanish Reconquista in 1492, by the failure of the
Turkish armies to take Vienna in 1529, and by the Battle of Lepanto in
1571, in which the joined navies of Spain, Venice, and the papal states,
under the leadership of Don Juan de Austria, dealt a crushing defeat to the
Turkish navy, which until then had been the dominant force in the eastern
Mediterranean.
    At the same time, the Atlantic ceased to be a barrier to the expansion of
Western civilization, and of Christianity with it. Sailing westward, the
Spanish conquered lands enormously larger than Spain itself, and in those
lands established the Roman Catholic faith. Sailing south around Africa, the
Portuguese established trading colonies and missions in the Far East. Islam,
which once seemed the greatest barrier to Christian expansion, now saw its
heartland hemmed in by the increasing economic and military might of
Western powers. Eventually, many of the traditional Muslim lands in North
Africa and in western Asia would become European colonies. When they
finally gained their independence in the twentieth century, and particularly
as oil revenues enriched them, some of these very lands would become
centers of a militant and anti-Western Islamic reaction.
    Meanwhile, in the lands far across the Atlantic, and in others in Sub-
Saharan Africa and in the Far East, Christianity was establishing firm
footholds, and centuries later these too would become centers of vitality and
mission, precisely at a time when Christianity was losing ground in Western
Europe.
    As is usually the case, those who lived at the time did not fully
comprehend the enormous consequences of the events they witnessed. Even
after the voyages of Columbus, the pope felt confident that he could avoid
conflicts between Spain and Portugal by decreeing that one should sail west
and the other east—with the predictable but unexpected result that they
would eventually collide in the Philippines. Luther continued to use the
term “Turks” to refer to people who were neither Christian nor Jewish.
Except in Spain and Portugal, the lands most affected—and enriched—by
the colonial enterprise, few gave much thought to what Amerigo Vespuci
declared to be a New World. Even in Spain, King Ferdinand, and his
grandson Charles V, were more concerned with the politics of the
Mediterranean than with the promises of the Atlantic.
    But there were other momentous changes that the entire population of
Europe did experience. In those very years of the sixteenth century when
these vast geopolitical changes were taking place, the towering edifice of
medieval Christianity collapsed. Salvaging what it could from the debacle,
the Council of Trent set the tone for modern Catholicism, while several
Protestant confessions arose amid the ruins. The ancient ideal of a single
church, with the pope as its visible head, which had never been current in
the East, now lost its power in the West as well. From that point on,
Western Christianity was divided among various traditions that reflected
great cultural and theological differences.
    At the dawning of the sixteenth century, in spite of the corruption that
prevailed in many quarters, and of the many voices clamoring for
reformation, there was general agreement among Christians that the church
was in essence one, and that its unity must be seen in its structure and
hierarchy. Indeed, all the main figures of the Protestant Reformation began
by holding such an understanding of the church, and very few came to the
place where they completely rejected it. Most of the major Protestant
leaders did believe that the unity of the church was essential to its nature,
and that therefore, although it was temporarily necessary to break that unity
in order to be faithful to the Word of God, that their very faithfulness
demanded that all possible efforts be made to regain the lost unity.
    The early sixteenth century also took for granted, as did the preceding
Middle Ages, that the existence and survival of a state demanded religious
agreement among its subjects. That notion, which Christians had rejected
when they constituted a minority in the Roman Empire, became prevalent a
few decades after the conversion of Constantine. All who lived in a
Christian state must be Christian, and faithful children of the church. The
only possible exceptions were Jews and, in some areas of Spain, Muslims.
But such exceptions were seen as anomalies, and did not protect the
followers of those religions from civil disenfranchisement and repeated
persecution.
    This view of national unity linked with religious uniformity was at the
root of the many wars of religion that shook both the sixteenth and the
seventeenth centuries. Eventually, in some areas sooner than in others, the
conclusion was reached that religious agreement was not necessary for the
security of the state, or that, although desirable, its price was too high. This
happened, for instance, in France, where the Edict of Nantes recognized the
failure of the previous policy requiring all the king’s subjects to fit a single
religious mold. In the Low Countries, for different political reasons, leaders
such as William the Silent also denied the need for religious uniformity.
Thus began a long process whose consequences would prove enormous, as
one after another the various European states—even those that still had an
official church—came to adopt policies of religious tolerance. This
eventually led to the more modern idea of the lay state—that is, a state with
no religious connections—that was decried by some churches and hailed by
others. (We shall return to these developments later in our narrative.)
    The sixteenth century also witnessed the collapse of the ancient dream
of political unity under the empire. The last emperor who, even in a limited
way, could harbor such illusions was Charles V. After him, the so-called
emperors were little more than kings of Germany and even there their
power was limited.
    Finally, the conciliarist hope for reformation was also shaken. For
several decades, the Protestant reformers hoped that a universal council
would prove them right and set the pope’s house in order. But exactly the
opposite took place. The papacy managed to achieve its own reformation
without the help of a council and, by the time the Council of Trent finally
assembled, it was clear that it would not be a truly international and
ecumenical tribunal but rather a tool in the hands of the papacy.
    Devout Christians, both Protestant and Catholic, whose lot it was to live
in the sixteenth century saw many of the old certainties crumble around
them. Even the discoveries and conquests that were taking place in the New
World, Africa, and Asia posed questions that could not be answered within
the old parameters. The medieval foundations—the papacy, the empire,
tradition—were no longer solid. As Galileo affirmed, the earth itself was
not a fixed point of reference. Social and political commotions were
frequent. The ancient feudal system was making way for the early stages of
capitalism.
    Such was the time of Luther, Erasmus, Calvin, Knox, Loyola, Menno
Simons, and the other great reformers. But in the midst of what could have
appeared chaotic, these reformers stood firm on their faith in the power of
the Word of God. That Word, which had created the world out of nothing,
was certainly capable of producing the reformation the entire church
needed, and to which the Protestant movement remained a preamble. Luther
and Calvin, for instance, always insisted that the power of the Word was
such that, as long as the Roman Catholic Church continued reading it, and
even though the pope and his advisors might refuse to listen to it, there was
always in the Roman communion a “vestige of the church,” and they
therefore awaited the day when the ancient church would once again
hearken to the Word, and reforms such as they advocated would take place.
    Thus, two cataclysmic events dominated the history of Christianity in
the sixteenth century: the Reformation and the colonization of vast new
lands—the latter aided by the temporary lull in the perceived threat of Islam
at Christendom’s Eastern borders. Most church historians have paid more
attention to the first of these than to the second. But the truth is that to this
day it is impossible to tell which of these two will ultimately have had a
greater impact on the future history of Christianity.




                     Suggested Readings


Paul Althaus. The Theology of Martin Luther. Philadelphia: Fortress, 1966.
Paul Ayris and David Selwyn. Thomas Cranmer: Churchman and Scholar.
  Woodbridge [UK]: Boydell Press, 1999.
Roland H. Bainton. Here I Stand: A Life of Martin Luther. Nashville:
  Abingdon, 1950.
Ernest Belfort Bax. Rise and Fall of the Anabaptists. New York: American
  Scholar Publications, 1966.
Gordon Donaldson. The Scottish Reformation. Cambridge: University
  Press, 1960.
Justo L. González. A History of Christian Thought. Vol. 3. Nashville:
   Abingdon, 1975.
P. E. Hughes. Theology of the English Reformers. London: Hodder &
   Stoughton, 1965.
Franklin H. Littell. The Free Church. Boston: Starr King, 1957.
Geddes Macgregor. The Thundering Scot: A Portrait of John Knox.
   London: Macmillan & Co., 1958.
Clyde L. Manschreck. Melanchthon: The Quiet Reformer. Nashville:
   Abingdon, 1958.
Martin Marty. Martin Luther. New York: Penguin Books, 2004.
John C. Olin. The Catholic Reformation: Savonarola to Ignatius Loyola.
   New York: Harper & Row, 1969.
H. J. Selderhuis, ed. The Calvin Handbook. Grand Rapids: Wm. B.
   Eerdmans. 2009.
W. Peter Stephens. Zwingli: An Introduction to His Thought. Oxford [UK]:
   Clarendon Press, 1994.
George Stroup. Calvin. Nashville: Abingdon, 2009.
Thomas Worcester, ed. The Cambridge Companion to the Jesuits.
   Cambridge [UK]: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
A. D. Wright. The Counter-Reformation: Catholic Europe and the Non-
   Christian World. Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2005.
        PART II


ORTHODOXY, RATIONALISM,
     AND PIETISM
                                    15

            An Age of Dogma and Doubt


   Our most holy religion is founded on Faith, not on reason; and it is a
   sure method of exposing it to put it to such a trial as it is, by no
   means, fitted to endure.


DAVID HUME

The sixteenth century had been a period of enormous religious vitality
which swept up Protestants and Catholics, theologians and rulers, the high
and the low. On either side of the religious struggles of the time, there were
those who were convinced that their purpose was religious. Charles V on
the Catholic side, and Frederick the Wise on the Protestant, knew of no
higher interest than the cause of God’s truth as they saw it, and
subordinated their political and personal ambitions to that cause. Luther and
Loyola lived through years of intense anguish before reaching the
conclusions and establishing the attitudes for which they are famous. Their
actions, and those of their immediate followers, bore the stamp of those
profound religious experiences. Even Henry VIII, whose character few
would praise, seems to have convinced himself that his actions in matters of
religion were guided by a sincere attempt to serve God. Therefore, the bitter
words and even violent actions with which Christians of one persuasion
attacked those of another were partly due to the strength of their
convictions, and to the overwhelming experiences that formed the basis of
their confessions of faith.
    But, as years went by, there was an increasing number who did not share
the enthusiasm—and often not even the convictions—of earlier generations.
Eventually, even some who were involved in wars of religion gave signs
that political and personal considerations were paramount. Typical was the
case of Henry IV of France, who repeatedly changed his religion in order to
save his life or to achieve his political goals. When he finally attained the
throne, his policy of limited religious tolerance was one of the pillars on
which he built modern France.
    During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, many followed Henry’s
example. The Thirty Years’ War, to which we shall turn in the next chapter,
had consequences in Germany similar to those of the earlier wars of
religion in France. More and more, German princes and their ministers
made use of religion in order to further their political programs. This
hindered the political unity of Germany at a time when nationalist sentiment
was on the rise, and therefore many Germans came to the conclusion that
doctrinal disagreements should not lead to war, and that religious tolerance
was a wiser policy.
    Partially as a result of all this, and partially as a result of new scientific
discoveries, rationalism took hold of Europe. Why be concerned about
details of Christian doctrine that produce nothing but quarrels and
prejudice, if natural reason, a faculty common to all human beings, can
answer the fundamental questions regarding God and human nature? Would
it not be much more profitable to construct a “natural religion” on that
basis, and to leave to the credulous and fanatical, all that can only claim
revealed authority? Hence, the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were
characterized by doubts regarding the traditional dogmas of both
Protestantism and Roman Catholicism.
    On the other hand, there were others whose zeal for true doctrine was no
less than Luther’s, Calvin’s, or Loyola’s. But this was no longer the time of
great theological discoveries, leading up unknown paths. Theologians in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries zealously defended the teachings of
the great figures of the sixteen, but without the fresh creativity of that
earlier generation. Their style became increasingly rigid, cold, and
academic. Their goal was no longer to be entirely open to the Word of God
but rather to uphold and clarify what others had said before them. Dogma
was often substituted for faith, and orthodoxy for love. Reformed, Lutheran,
and Catholic alike developed orthodoxies to which one had to either adhere
strictly or be counted out of the fold of the faithful.
    Not all, however, were content with such orthodoxies. The rationalist
option has already been mentioned. Others whose beliefs were not accepted
in their native country migrated to new lands. Some sought an alternative
by emphasizing the spiritual dimension of the gospel, sometimes ignoring
or even denying its relation to physical and political realities. Still others—
the Methodists in England, and the Pietists on the Continent—organized
groups of believers who, while not severing their ties with the established
churches, sought to cultivate a more intense and personal faith and piety.




In this Puritan drawing, a preacher is being pulled from the pulpit by two “enemies of God’s word.”

   From all this follows the outline of this portion of our narrative. We shall
deal first with the great religious wars that took place in Germany (Chapter
16), France (Chapter 17), and England (Chapter 18). We shall then turn to
the development of orthodoxy within Roman Catholicism (Chapter 19),
Lutheranism (Chapter 20), and the Reformed or Calvinist tradition (Chapter
21). Chapter 22 will deal with rationalism. In Chapter 23 we shall look at
those who sought refuge in a spiritualist interpretation of the gospel.
German Pietism and English Methodism will be the subject of Chapter 24.
And, at the end of this section, in Chapter 25, we shall look at those who
decided to seek an alternative in the new colonies beyond the Atlantic.
                                      16

                  The Thirty Years’ War


   Where, alas, shall we have the liberty to appear before the Lord in
   His own house, without our lives being thereby endangered?
                                          A PROTESTANT PREACHER IN 1638



The Peace of Augsburg, which put an end to religious wars in Germany in
the sixteenth century, could not last. It stipulated that princes or rulers, both
Catholic and Protestant, would be free to determine the religion of their
territories, and their subjects who wished to do so could migrate to lands
where the official religion coincided with their own. This agreement,
however, included no Protestants but those who subscribed to the
Confession of Augsburg; and therefore all others, including Calvinists, were
still considered heretics and subject to persecution. Since the freedom to
choose their religion was granted only to rulers, many of their subjects were
restless and unhappy. Finally, the Peace of Augsburg included the
“ecclesiastical reservation,” which guaranteed that territories ruled by
bishops would remain Catholic even if their bishops became Protestant. For
all these reasons, the peace achieved at Augsburg was at best an armistice
that would hold only as long as each side felt unable to take military action
against the other.

                         THE STORM GATHERS
Rudolf II, who had become emperor in 1576, was not trusted by Protestants,
for he had been educated in Spain under the Jesuits, and it was said that
they still determined many of his policies. He was able to reign in relative
peace for thirty years, for he was a weak ruler whose policies favoring of
Catholicism were often ignored. Then, in 1606, there were riots in the
imperial city of Donauwörth. This city, on the border of staunchly Catholic
Bavaria, had opted for Protestantism and, by 1606, the only Catholic
nucleus remaining in it was a monastery where residents were allowed the
free exercise of their religion but only within the monastery itself. But now
the monks, perhaps encouraged by the emperor’s favor, went out in
procession, and the people went at them with clubs and stones, forcing them
to withdraw to the monastery. Such incidents were not uncommon at the
time, and usually ended with a word of admonition to both sides. In this
case, however, more drastic action was taken. More than a year after the
event, Duke Maximilian of Bavaria, who felt called to stamp out
Protestantism, appeared at Donauwörth with a substantial army and set
about forcing the conversion of the citizens to Catholicism.
    The reaction was not slow in coming. Early in 1608, Protestants banded
together in an Evangelical Union. A year later, their opponents organized
the Catholic League. The Union, however, did not include all Protestants;
therefore, if war were to break out, it was clear that the Catholic League
would have little trouble crushing the Evangelical Union.
    Meanwhile, in nearby Bohemia, events were also leading to a
confrontation. This was the land of the ancient Hussites, who had aligned
themselves with Reformed Protestantism, and to whom were now added
large numbers of German Calvinist immigrants which made the majority of
the population heretical in Catholic eyes. Rebellion threatened, and
Rudolf’s bungling forced him to abdicate. His brother and successor,
Matthias, fared no better. His cousin Ferdinand, whom he appointed king of
Bohemia, was a staunch Catholic who soon won the distrust of his subjects.
When the Royal Council in Prague refused to listen to their objections to
the king’s policies, the Bohemian Protestants revolted and threw two of the
king’s advisors out the window—who were not badly hurt because they fell
onto a pile of garbage. This episode, known as the Defenestration of
Prague, sparked the Thirty Years’ War, probably the bloodiest and most
devastating European war prior to the twentieth century.
                       THE COURSE OF THE WAR
The Bohemians then called upon Frederick, elector of the Palatinate, to be
their king. The Palatinate, although separated from Bohemia by Catholic
Bavaria and other territories, was mostly Reformed, and therefore seemed a
natural ally to the Bohemians. Rebellion soon spread east of Bohemia to the
neighboring provinces of Silesia and Moravia. Meanwhile, Matthias had
died, and his cousin, now Emperor Ferdinand II, called on Maximilian of
Bavaria and the Catholic League to invade Bohemia. This they did, and
dealt the rebels such a crushing blow that they were forced to surrender.
Frederick was deposed from both the throne of Bohemia and his hereditary
lands in the Palatinate. Bohemia was restored to the same King Ferdinand
whom the rebels had repudiated, and Maximilian received the Palatinateas a
reward for his services. In both areas Protestants found themselves under
persecution. Several of their leaders were executed, and those with property
suffered its confiscation. In Bohemia, it was decreed that by Easter of 1626
any who were not ready to become Catholic must leave the country. These
and similar measures caused such devastation that, over the thirty years the
war lasted, the population of Bohemia declined by an estimated four-fifths.




         The Defenestration of Prague marked the beginning of the Thirty Years’ War.
    The successes of Maximilian caused grave consternation among
Protestant powers. To this were added dynastic considerations, for the house
of Hapsburg—which ruled in Spain and had also held the imperial dignity
since the time of Charles V—was feared by other ruling houses. Therefore,
late in 1625, England, the Netherlands, and Denmark joined in a Protestant
League that proposed to invade Germany and restore Frederick—who was a
son-in-law of James I of England—to his lands in the Palatinate. They also
had the support of several German Protestant princes, and even of a few
Catholics who feared the growing power of the Hapsburgs. Meanwhile,
Ferdinand II, not content to trust his empire to the sole defense of
Maximilian and the Catholic League, resolved to raise his own army, which
he placed under the command of Albert of Wallenstein. Therefore, when
Christian IV of Denmark invaded Germany, he had to contend with two
armies, Maximilian’s and Wallenstein’s. Marches and battles once again
ravaged German soil, until Ferdinand II and Christian IV agreed to the
Treaty of Lübeck. The Danes withdrew from Germany, having achieved
nothing of great consequence besides bringing further suffering to a land
already ravaged by war. Thousands of forced conversions to Catholicism
followed.
    Then help arrived from another quarter. In 1611, when he was only
seventeen years of age, Gustavus Adolphus had inherited the Swedish
throne. This was a poor inheritance, for the Danes then held much of
Sweden, and the land was divided among several factions, none of which
showed great respect for the crown. But the young king proved an able ruler
who slowly reunited his subjects and expelled the Danish invaders. As his
power grew, he increasingly turned his attention to the threat of Hapsburgs
attempting to gain possession of Swedish lands on the Baltic Sea. Since
Gustavus Adolphus was also a staunch Lutheran who bewailed the events
that were taking place in Bohemia and Germany, he felt compelled to
intervene with the double purpose of defending the Protestants and
defeating the ambitions of the Hapsburgs.
    Ferdinand II had disbanded Wallenstein’s army, whose leader he feared,
and he based his power on the support of the Catholic League. In 1630,
when Gustavus Adolphus invaded Germany, the army facing Ferdinand II
in the name of the emperor in truth belonged to the Catholic League. At
first the Swedes found little support among German Protestants, who feared
the emperor’s wrath and in any case did not trust the Swedish invader. But
Gustavus Adolphus was a very able general whose repeated victories soon
became legendary. His soldiers, in contrast to all the armies that had
marched in this protracted war, treated the native population with kindness
and respect. While the Swedes were clearly Protestant, they did not force
the conversion of Catholics in the areas they conquered. Repeatedly,
Gustavus Adolphus made it clear that he did not seek to dismember
Germany for Swedish profit. When France offered him financial support in
his campaign against the Hapsburgs, he accepted it on the condition that it
be understood that not a single village in German territory would become
French. Eventually, several powerful German Protestant princes came to his
support. The Catholic League besieged Magdeburg, hoping that the Swedes
would rush to its rescue and fall into the trap that had been laid for them.
But Gustavus Adolphus saw through their plans, and continued his
campaign as he had outlined it. The League then took Magdeburg, whose
citizens they massacred, and then marched on to do battle with the Swedes.
In the fields near Leipzig, the League was roundly defeated, and Gustavus
Adolphus sent some of his German allies to invade Bohemia while he
marched into southern Germany and threatened Bavaria, the very heart of
the Catholic League. By then several Catholic leaders were suing for peace,
and many were willing to agree to the terms imposed by the Swedish king:
religious tolerance for both Catholics and Protestants, the restoration of its
ancient rights to the kingdom of Bohemia, the return of the Palatinate to
Frederick, and the expulsion of the Jesuits from the empire.
Wallenstein, accused by his enemies of being overly ambitious, was one of the ablest generals of his
                                               time.

    Since the Catholic League had failed him, Ferdinand II once again called
on Wallenstein, who came to his succor only after having been promised
vast rewards. Wallenstein attacked the Protestants who had taken Prague,
and forced them to withdraw. Then he joined the remnants of the Catholic
League’s army, and marched to do battle with the Swedes. They met on the
fields of Lützen, where Wallenstein’s army was crushed, but Gustavus
Adolphus was killed.
    The war then degenerated into skirmishes, banditry, and protracted
negotiations. The Swedish government was ready for peace; but for their
officers and troops, who had spent years in the field, war had become a way
of life. Wallenstein secretly negotiated with the Swedish, the French, and
the German Protestants. The emperor received word of this, and
Wallenstein and several of his officers were murdered, although it is not
certain that this was done by Ferdinand’s direct order. The Spanish
Hapsburgs sent an army to support their cousins in Germany. The French
then became bolder in their support of the Protestants, even though France
was then ruled by a cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church. Meanwhile, it
was the people who suffered in this war the religious motivations of which
were by then nearly forgotten, and which had become little more than an
excuse for a power struggle.

                      THE PEACE OF WESTPHALIA
Eventually, even the most bloodthirsty tired of war and destruction.
Ferdinand II had died in 1637, and his son and successor Ferdinand III,
although a sincere Catholic, did not share his father’s intolerance. Germans
bemoaned seeing their land invaded by foreign troops in support of both
sides. Sweden was ready to withdraw its army. France knew that the time
had come when the greatest concessions could be obtained. Therefore, after
long and complicated negotiations, the Peace of Westphalia, signed in 1648,
put an end to the conflict that came to be known as the Thirty Years’ War.
    France and Sweden profited the most from the war, for the former
expanded its borders to the Rhine, while the latter received vast lands on the
Baltic and the North Sea. Since both France and Sweden wished it, German
princes were given greater powers, to the detriment of imperial authority. In
religious matters, it was agreed that all—princes as well as their subjects—
would be free to follow their own religion, as long as they were Catholics,
Lutherans, or Reformed. (Once again, Anabaptists, whom many considered
subversive, were excluded.) Buildings and institutions were to revert to the
ownership of the religious confessions that had held them in the year 1624.
And a general amnesty was granted to all who during the war had rebelled
against their masters—except in the hereditary possessions of the
Hapsburgs.
                              The Thirty Years’ War

    These were the immediate results of that long and cruel war. But there
were other consequences that, although not mentioned in the peace
agreement, were no less significant. The principles of tolerance of the Peace
of Westphalia were not born out of a deeper understanding of Christian
love, but rather out of a growing indifference to religion accompanied by
the feeling, even among those of deep religious commitments, that such
commitments should remain private, and not be carried into civil and
political life. The war had amply shown the atrocities that resulted from
attempting to settle religious matters by force of arms. In the end, nothing
had been resolved. Perhaps rulers should not allow their decisions to be
guided by religious or confessional considerations, but rather by their own
self-interest, or by the interests of their subjects. Thus, the modern secular
state began to develop, as did doubt regarding matters that previous
generations had taken for granted. On what grounds did theologians dare to
affirm that they were correct, and that others were mistaken? Could any
doctrine be true that produced the atrocities of the Thirty Years’ War? Was
there not a more tolerant, more profound, and even more Christian way to
serve God than simply following the dictates of orthodoxy, be it Catholic or
Protestant? These were some of the questions posed by the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, partly as a result of the Thirty Years’ War and other
similar events.
                                     17

               The Church of the Desert


   A spirit of sanctification, of power . . . and above all of martyrdom,
   while teaching us to die each day in our inner being . . . also prepares
   and disposes us to offer our lives with courage in the torture chamber
   and on the gallows, if Divine Providence calls us to it.


ANTOINE COURT

The assassination of Henry IV by the fanatical Ravaillac, on May 14,
1610, caused great misgivings among French Protestants. Although Henry
had declared himself a Catholic for reasons of political convenience, he had
proven a faithful friend to his former companions of religion and arms,
whose freedom and lives he protected by the Edict of Nantes. They knew
that many of their former enemies deplored the peace and tolerance that the
deceased king had brought about, and would now seek to undo his policies.
Since the new king, Louis XIII, was only eight years old, the government
was in the hands of the king’s mother, Marie de Medici—the second wife of
Henry IV—who felt the need to allay mistrust by confirming the Edict of
Nantes. On the basis of that action, the following general assembly of the
French Huguenots swore fidelity to the new king.
   But Marie gathered around herself a coterie of Italian advisors who
understood neither the conditions in France, nor the pain and blood that had
been the price for the existing state of affairs. They followed a policy of
close collaboration with the Hapsburgs, and particularly with the Spanish
branch of that house, which was known for its uncompromising
Catholicism and its hatred of Protestantism. The young king was married to
the Spanish princess Anne of Austria, and his sister, Isabella, to the future
Philip IV of Spain. This provoked several Huguenot uprisings that achieved
no more than the death of their leaders and the loss of a number of
Protestant strongholds.




Although he was a cardinal of the Roman Church, Richelieu did not allow religious considerations to
   affect his policies and was quite ready to support Protestantism in his enemies’ lands, if only to
                                            embarrass them.

   Toward 1622, while Marie de Medici was losing her power, Cardinal
Armand de Richelieu was a rising star in the French court. Within two
years, he had become the king’s most trusted advisor. He was a wily
politician whose main goals were the aggrandizement of the French crown
and of his own personal power. Although he was a cardinal of the Church of
Rome, his religious policy was not based on theological or confessional
considerations, but rather on calculations of convenience. Thus, since he
was convinced that the main enemies of the French Bourbons were the
Hapsburgs, his interventions in the Thirty Years’ War—consisting mostly of
undercover financial support—were in favor of the Protestants and against
the Catholic emperor. The same political considerations, however, led
Richelieu to an entirely different religious policy in France. He had no
qualms about dividing Germany by supporting the Protestant party against
the emperor. But in France the Huguenot party must be destroyed, for it was
a cyst within the state. Again, what most concerned Richelieu was not that
the Huguenots were Protestant heretics, but rather that Henry IV, in order to
guarantee their security, had granted them several fortified cities, and these
allowed the Huguenots to declare themselves faithful servants of the crown
while retaining the ability to rebel and resist if their rights were violated.
Richelieu’s centralizing policies could not tolerate the existence of such
independent power within the French state.
    Richelieu’s efforts to dissolve the Protestant cyst led to armed action in
the Siege of La Rochelle, the main Huguenot stronghold. The siege lasted a
year, during which the defenders courageously resisted the pick of the
French army. When the city finally surrendered, of its twenty-five thousand
inhabitants there remained only fifteen hundred famished and feeble
survivors. The fortifications of the city were razed and Catholic mass was
celebrated in all its churches. On hearing of this, several other Protestant
cities took up arms against the king. But none of them was able to offer as
staunch a defense as had La Rochelle, and in many of them the king’s
troops followed a policy of extermination.
    However, what caused Richelieu grave concern was not the existence of
Protestants in France, nor the continuation of their life of worship, but
simply the political power they enjoyed. Therefore, once their fortified
cities were taken in 1629, he issued an edict of toleration for Protestants, in
both religious and civil matters. Without their military strongholds, the
Huguenots were no longer a threat to the crown, and Richelieu had no
intention of bleeding the country and weakening its economy in a protracted
civil war. Having dealt with Protestant political and military power, the
cardinal turned his attention to undoing the Hapsburgs; thus, during the last
years of Richelieu’s government, the Huguenots enjoyed relative peace.
    Richelieu’s death, in 1642, was followed by that of the king the
following year. The new king, Louis XIV, was then five years old, and his
mother and regent, Anne of Austria, entrusted affairs of state to Cardinal
Jules Mazarin, a former collaborator of Richelieu who continued the
policies of his predecessor. For several decades after the fall of La Rochelle
and the other Protestant cities, French Protestants enjoyed religious
tolerance. Although Mazarin’s government was marked by repeated
conspiracies and rebellions, Protestants were generally not involved in
them, and their numbers grew among all social classes. In the countryside
there were many Protestants, both among peasants and among rural
nobility. And in the cities Huguenot intellectuals were accepted into the
most distinguished salons.
    Louis XIV was twenty-three years old when Mazarin died, and he
refused to name a successor to the cardinal. The king, who came to be
called “the Sun King,” would allow no one to overshadow him. For that
reason he also clashed with the pope, who sought to intervene in French
affairs. Against the centralizing efforts of the papacy of his time, Louis
proclaimed and defended the “liberties of the Gallican church”—to which
we shall return in chapter 19. But, for exactly the same reasons, he had no
patience with heretics or dissidents of any sort, and therefore took strong
measures to stamp out French Protestantism.




  Mazarin, Richelieu’s successor, changed very few of the policies followed by the great cardinal.

   The king’s measures to achieve the reunion—as conversion to
Catholicism was called—of Protestants were diverse, and grew sterner with
the passage of time. First there were attempts of persuasion and mild
pressure. Then the king practically offered to buy conversions. The
argument was that Protestant pastors who became Catholic lost their
livelihood, and that those from among the laity who did likewise lost their
clients or other means of support. Therefore, as a means of balancing such
losses, money was offered to any who would convert. But that policy was
not successful, and then the king had to resort to more severe measures.
When, in 1684, France enjoyed a brief respite from the constant wars in
which the Sun King involved the nation, the army was used to force the
“reunion” of French Protestants. This policy of violence enjoyed great
success, for in some areas tens of thousands were forcibly converted to
Catholicism.
    Finally, in 1685, the king issued the Edict of Fontainebleau, abolishing
the provisions of the Edict of Nantes, and making it illegal to be a
Protestant in France. A mass exodus immediately ensued, for French
Huguenots fled to Switzerland, Germany, England, the Netherlands, and
North America. Since many of these refugees were artisans and merchants,
their departure represented a great economic loss to France—to the point,
that it has been suggested, that the economic disruption caused by the Edict
of Fontainebleau was one of the causes leading to the French Revolution.
    Officially, there were no more Protestants in France after the Edict of
Fontainebleau. In truth, however, many who had been outwardly converted
held fast to their previous beliefs, and managed to continue gathering for
the celebration of Protestant worship. For many of them, such gatherings
were made all the more necessary inasmuch as they bore a heavy burden on
their conscience for having denied their faith. Lacking church buildings,
they turned to the open fields, or to clearings in the woods. In such places,
under cover of night, and all over the country, tens and even hundreds of
believers came together periodically to listen to the Word, confess their
sins, and break bread. The secret of such gatherings was zealously guarded,
and seldom were the agents of the government able to discover the
appointed time and place. When they did gain intelligence on such
meetings, they waited until all had arrived, and then fell upon the
worshipers and arrested them. The men were sent off to row in the galleys,
and the women were imprisoned for the rest of their days. Pastors were
executed, and children were placed in foster families to be reared as
Catholics. In spite of this, the movement continued; and the king’s agents
were unable to stamp out the Christians of the desert, as the Huguenots now
called themselves.
    As often happens in such cases, the movement then developed a radical
and visionary wing, claiming that the end of the world was at hand. From
his exile in Rotterdam, Pastor Pierre Jurieu published a study of the book of
Revelation in which he showed that its prophecies were being fulfilled, and
that the final victory would take place in 1689. Encouraged by such
announcements, some of the Protestants in France became more audacious,
and as a result many were killed or condemned to the galleys. But prophetic
visions and mystical experiences abounded, and increasing numbers were
willing to die for a cause about to be vindicated by God. Some heard
voices. Others spoke while in trance. All this made it easier for the
authorities to find the recalcitrant Protestants, who were then cruelly
tortured. But very few were made to utter the fateful words, “I reunite”—
that is, I return to the Catholic Church.
    Then this prophetic spirit turned to armed rebellion. This was no longer
led by Protestant nobles, as in the earlier wars of religion. The new army
“of the desert” was formed mostly by peasants. These peasants still plowed,
sowed, and harvested, but during the rest of the time they gathered in armed
bands that attacked royal troops. Before marching out they read Scripture,
and in the field of battle they sang psalms. Although these rebels never
numbered more than a few hundred, they kept an army of twenty-five
thousand men fully occupied. For reasons not altogether clear, the rebels
came to be known as camisards. Since conventional warfare was unable to
put the rebels down, the army followed a policy of razing the areas where
the camisards operated. About five hundred villages and hamlets were thus
destroyed. But this only served to engross the ranks of the rebels, now
reinforced by many who had been left homeless. This struggle continued
for many years. By making promises that were not kept, the king’s officials
were able to stop the rebellion in some areas. But resistance continued until
1709, when the last camisard leaders were captured and executed. By then,
their resistance had become legendary in Protestant countries, although no
one had given the camisards any significant aid. In 1710, the English finally
decided to support them. But by then it was too late, for the last sparks of
rebellion had been snuffed out.
    Meanwhile, a different group had come to the foreground among French
Protestants. These other leaders did not trust apocalyptic visions—which, in
any case, had failed to come true—and advocated a return to the Reformed
tradition, with worship centered on the clear and careful exposition of
Scripture. The outstanding leader of this group was Antoine Court, who in
1715 organized the first synod of the French Reformed Church. Following
Calvin and Beza’s teachings, Court advised his followers that civil
authorities should be obeyed in all matters, except when they demanded
something that was contrary to the Word of God, and this became the
official policy of the newly organized church. Ten days after the meeting of
that first synod, Louis XIV died, and was succeeded by his five-year-old
great-grandson Louis XV. But the death of the Sun King brought no respite
to the persecuted Huguenots, for the new government, under the regency of
Philippe d’Orleans, continued the religious policies of the previous reign. In
spite of this, Court and his followers persisted on the course they had set for
themselves. When one of his pastors was imprisoned, Court ordered his
followers to refrain from violence as a means to save the man from death.
In 1726, a seminary in exile was founded in Lausanne, Switzerland. French
candidates for the ministry attended it before returning to their own country,
and thus the French Reformed Church began developing a cadre of
preachers who were well-versed in Scripture and theology. In 1729, Court
himself moved to Lausanne, where he became the mentor to an entire
generation of clandestine preachers. Although now living in exile, Court
visited France repeatedly, encouraging and directing the affairs of the
Reformed Church. By the time of his death in 1767, at eighty-three years of
age, Reformed Protestantism was firmly rooted in France. But persecution
continued until 1787, when the grandson and successor of Louis XV, Louis
XVI, finally decreed religious tolerance. During that long period of
persecution, thousands of men had been sent to the galleys, and a like
number of women had been condemned to life-imprisonment, while only a
handful had uttered the words, “I reunite.” Two pastors had denied their
faith, but countless others had died for their unwillingness to recant. The
“church of the desert” had survived.
    That struggle, like the Thirty Years’ War in Germany, produced in many
people a profound distrust of dogma and dogmatism. Among them was
Voltaire, who defended the Protestant cause, not because he felt any
sympathy for it, but rather because he considered intolerance to be both
absurd and immoral. During those years of persecution and resistance, of
horror and glory, the minds were shaped that would later espouse the ideals
of the French Revolution.
                                      18

                   The Puritan Revolution


     The civil magistrate may not assume to himself the administration of
     the Word and Sacraments . . . yet he hath authority, and it is his duty
     to take order, that unity and peace be preserved in the Church, that
     the truth of God be kept pure and entire, that all blasphemies and
     heresies be suppressed, all corruptions and abuses in worship and
     discipline prevented or reformed, and all the ordinances of God duly
     settled, administered, and observed.


WESTMINSTER CONFESSION

In  discussing the Reformation in England, we have seen that Queen
Elizabeth followed an intermediate course between those conservatives who
sought to retain as much as possible of ancient practice and belief, and the
Calvinist Protestants who believed that the entire life and structure of the
church ought to adjust to what they saw as the biblical norm. During the
queen’s lifetime, that delicate balance was maintained; but the tensions
inherent in the situation surfaced repeatedly, and only the strong and
decisive intervention of the queen and her ministers was able to restrain
them.

                                   JAMES I
When Elizabeth died in 1603 she left no direct heir, but declared her
legitimate successor to be James, the son of Mary Stuart, who was already
king of Scotland. The transition took place without major difficulties, and
thus the house of Stuart came to reign over England. The new king—James
I of England, but James VI of Scotland—did not find the government of
England an easy matter. The English always considered him a foreigner. His
plans for the union of the two kingdoms—which eventually came about—
won him enemies in both Scotland and England. Elizabeth’s measures in
favor of trade were bearing fruit, and therefore the merchant class, which
resented the king’s policies in support of the nobility and his favorites, was
becoming increasingly powerful. But James’s greatest conflicts were with
those Protestants who thought that the Reformation had not progressed
sufficiently far enough in England, and that this was due to the policies of
the sovereigns and their advisors. Since neighboring Scotland, from whence
the new king had originated, had moved further along the road of
reformation, English Calvinists felt that the time was ripe for similar
changes in their own land.
    These more radical Protestants were not organized in a single group, nor
did they agree on all matters, and therefore it is difficult to describe them in
general terms. They were given the name Puritans because they insisted on
the need to purify the Church through a return to biblical religion. They
opposed many of the traditional elements of worship that the Church of
England had retained, such as the use of the cross, certain priestly garments,
and the celebration of communion on an altar—whether there ought to be a
table or an altar, and where this was to be placed, implied varying
interpretations of the meaning of communion and led to long and bitter
controversy. They also insisted on the need for a sober life, guided by the
commandments of Scripture, and lacking in luxury and ostentation. Since a
great deal of the worship of the Church of England appeared to them as
needlessly elaborate, this caused further objection to that worship. Many
insisted on the need to keep the Lord’s Day, devoting it exclusively to
religious exercises and to the practice of charity. They also rejected the
Book of Common Prayer and the use of written prayers in general, declaring
that such prayers led to insincerity, so that even the Lord’s Prayer, rather
than a set of words to be repeated, was to be used as a model for prayer.
They were not absolutely opposed to the use of alcohol, for most of them
drank moderately, but they were very critical of drunkenness, particularly
among ministers of the Church of England. They were also very critical of
all that they considered licentious—and this included the theater, not only
because immorality was often depicted, but also because of the apparent
duplicity implicit in acting.
    Many Puritans were opposed to bishops. They argued that the
episcopacy, at least as it existed in their time, was a later invention, not to
be found in the Bible; and that the church ought to look to Scripture as its
constitution not only in matters of doctrine, but also in things having to do
with its organization and governance. The more moderate among the
Puritans simply declared that in the Bible one could find several forms of
church government, and that therefore the episcopacy, although perhaps
good and useful, was not a matter “of divine right.” Others insisted that the
New Testament church was ruled by “presbyters,” that is, by elders, and
that a truly biblical church ought to be so ruled. Still others affirmed that
each congregation ought to be independent of all others, and were dubbed
“Independents.”
    The Baptists arose mostly among these independents. One of their early
leaders was John Smyth (1554–1612), an Anglican priest who decided that
Anglicanism had not gone far enough in the process of reformation and
established an independent—and therefore illegal—congregation. As this
congregation grew, Smyth and his followers decided to flee to Amsterdam.
There he continued his study of the Bible, and came to the point of refusing
to use translations of the Bible in worship, for only the original text had
absolute authority. At church, he would read Scripture in Hebrew or Greek,
and translate the text as he preached. Partly through his study of Scripture,
and partly through contact with the Mennonites—whose pacifism and
refusal to take oaths he adopted—he eventually became convinced that
infant baptism is not valid, and therefore proceeded first to baptize himself
with a bucket and a ladle, by pouring water over his head, and then to
baptize his followers—for which his critics dubbed him “the self-baptizer.”
    The flight of Smyth and his congregation to Amsterdam had been
financed by a well-to-do lawyer, Thomas Helwys, who broke ranks with
Smyth over the issues of absolute pacifism and the taking of oaths—which
Helwys, as a lawyer, considered fundamental to social order. Helwys and
his followers then returned to England, where in 1611 they founded the first
Baptist Church in the land.
    Eventually, there was disagreement among Baptists over matters similar
to those that divided the strict Calvinists and the Arminians (see Chapter
21). Those who took the Arminian position came to be known as General
Baptists, for they believed that salvation was generally available to all, in
contrast to the “Particular Baptists,” who held that only the predestined
would be saved.
    Meanwhile, the official church was following a parallel but opposite
course. Elizabeth’s balance had been achieved by establishing a church
whose theology was moderately Calvinist, while retaining in its worship
and governance all that did not clearly and directly contradict its new
theology. But this Elizabethan settlement was difficult to maintain. In order
to defend traditional elements in worship, some began to abandon Calvinist
theology. Among the leading theologians of the Church of England there
was such appreciation for the beauty of worship as it was then practiced that
there was little effort to make it conform to such outside requirements as
theology or biblical exegesis. Soon Puritans began to fear that a vast
movement was afoot to return to “Romanism.”
    All these elements were already present below the surface when James
inherited Elizabeth’s crown. From that point on, conflicts that had been
latent for a long time would surface with increasing violence. The Puritans
did not trust the new king, whose mother was none other than Mary Stuart.
In truth, James did not favor the Catholics, who had hoped to gain major
concessions from him, and were repeatedly disappointed. His ideal was an
absolute monarchy such as existed in France. In Scotland, his Presbyterian
subjects had not allowed him to reign with the freedom he wished—and
was convinced kings deserved—and therefore in England he sought to
strengthen the episcopacy as a means to increase his own power. As he is
said to have declared, “Without bishops, there is no king”—in other words,
the monarchical structure of the state was to be supported by the
monarchical structure of the church.
    James’s personal character did little to increase his prestige. He was a
homosexual at a time when there were great prejudices against
homosexuality, and his favorites enjoyed unmerited privileges and power in
his court and in his government. While insisting on his right to be an
absolute monarch, he wavered between stubborn rigidity and weak
flexibility. Although he managed his finances honestly, he was prodigal in
spending for superfluous matters, and important projects were hindered for
lack of funds. His liberality in granting titles and honors to his friends
offended many who had served the crown for a lifetime with little or no
reward.
   James tried to follow a religious policy similar to that of Elizabeth. Only
the Anabaptists were systematically persecuted, for their egalitarian ideas
horrified the king. Catholics were seen as loyal to the pope, and therefore as
potential traitors. But if the pope was willing to acknowledge James’s right
to the throne, and to condemn regicide—which some extreme Catholics
proposed as a solution to England’s religious troubles—the king was
willing to tolerate Catholics in his kingdoms. Presbyterians, whom the king
had come to hate in Scotland, were tolerated in England, and James even
granted them some minor concessions. But the one thing that he would not
abandon was the episcopal system of government, for he was convinced—
and rightly so—that the bishops were among the most committed and useful
supporters of the crown.




James I of England, who was also James VI of Scotland, was convinced that the alliance between the
crown and the episcopacy was absolutely necessary; he therefore abhorred the Presbyterian form of
                            government advocated by many Puritans.
    The tension between the prelates of the official church and the Puritans
grew during James’s reign. In 1604, Richard Bancroft, archbishop of
Canterbury, had a series of canons approved in which it was affirmed that
episcopal hierarchy was an institution of divine origin, and that without it
there could be no true church. This implied a rejection of the many
Protestant churches on the Continent that had no bishops, and therefore
Puritans saw in it a step toward breaking Protestant ties in order to
reintroduce Catholicism in England. Besides this, several other canons
approved on the archbishop’s insistence were clearly directed against
Puritans.
    Parliament was in session, for James had been compelled to call it in
order to approve new taxes. The lower chamber, or House of Commons,
included many Puritans who now joined with others in an appeal to the king
against Bancroft’s canons. James called a conference that gathered at
Hampton Court, over which he presided. When one of the Puritans made
passing reference to a “presbytery,” the king declared that there could be no
closer connection between the monarchy and a presbytery than that between
God and the Devil. All attempts at conciliation failed, and the only result of
that meeting was the new translation of the Bible that appeared in 1611,
generally known as the King James Version. Since this was produced at the
high point of the English language, it—as well as the Book of Common
Prayer—became a classic that profoundly influenced later English
literature.
    That was the beginning of a growing enmity between the House of
Commons and the more conservative of the bishops. The latter joined the
king in affirming that bishops as well as kings rule by divine right. In 1606,
a new series of canons, more clearly anti-Puritan, was approved by church
authorities. Parliament responded by attacking, not the king or the
archbishop, but the more vulnerable of their defenders. Eventually, during
the next reign, this growing tension would lead to civil war.
    Meanwhile, late in 1605, what was called the Gunpowder Plot was
discovered. A repressive law against Catholics had been issued the previous
year, on the pretext that they were loyal to the pope rather than to the king.
It seems that its real purpose was to collect funds, for the authorities used it
mostly to impose heavy fines and to confiscate property. In any case, some
Catholics decided that it was necessary to be rid of the king. One of them
rented a property whose underground storage extended below Parliament’s
meeting place. The plan was to fill several wine barrels with gunpowder, set
them directly under the meeting room, and blow them up while the king
was opening the next session of Parliament. This would kill both the king
and the Puritans who now sat in Parliament. But the plot was discovered,
and the main conspirators, as well as several whose participation in the plot
was never proven, were executed. In some areas, Catholics were hunted
down. James himself seems to have attempted to distinguish between the
guilty and those who were simply Catholic. But he did take the opportunity
to impose more fines and confiscations. Soon thousands of Catholics were
in prison.
    After the first years of his reign, James tried to rule without convening
Parliament. But the authorization of that body was required in order to
impose new taxes, and therefore, in 1614, when his financial situation was
desperate, James decided to convoke a meeting of Parliament. When the
new elections resulted in a House of Commons that was even more
intractable than the previous one, James dissolved it and tried to manage
with only those tariffs that he had the authority to impose. He was also
compelled to borrow from the bishops and the nobility. Then the Thirty
Years’ War broke out. The deposed elector of the Palatine and King of
Bohemia, Frederick, was James’s son-in-law. But James did not offer him
support, and many English Protestants began declaring that he was a
coward and a traitor, while he retorted that he could not intervene in the war
for lack of funds. Finally, in 1621, the king called Parliament once again,
hoping that the Puritans in the House of Commons would agree to new
taxes with the proviso that some of the additional revenue would go to
support of German Protestants. But then it was learned that the king was
planning to marry his son and heir to a Spanish princess. Such an alliance
with the Hapsburgs was an abomination before the eyes of the Puritans in
Parliament, who approved some minor taxes and then insisted on presenting
their grievances before the king. The latter responded by dissolving the
assembly and arresting several of its leaders. The marriage plans were then
abandoned for other reasons, and in 1624 James once again called a
meeting of Parliament, only to dissolve it anew without obtaining the funds
he required. Shortly thereafter, the king died, and was succeeded by his son
Charles.
                                CHARLES I
The new king was as convinced as his father had been of the need for a
centralized and powerful monarchy, and therefore he too clashed with
Parliament. The Puritans were suspicious of the king’s intentions for, after
the failed negotiations with Spain, Charles had married a sister of King
Louis XIII of France. The negotiations leading to this marriage had
included concessions to English Catholics, and it was also agreed that the
new queen and her court would be free to continue their religious
observances. Many Puritans saw in this a restoration of idolatry, and
complained that apostasy had now entered the royal household. Soon some
were comparing the queen with Jezebel, although still only in private
circles.
    Charles inherited his father’s conflicts with Parliament, and these came
to a head in the trial of Richard Montague, a proponent of the divine right
of kings and an enemy of both Puritanism and the parliamentary system. He
had published several books on these subjects, and finally, after the
publication of one that was particularly offensive to Parliament, the House
of Commons brought him to trial and condemned him to a fine and
imprisonment. King Charles saved his supporter by making him his
personal chaplain, and thus exempt from the authority of Parliament. Talk
then began of retaliating by accusing the duke of Buckingham, a minister of
the crown, of high treason. The king then dissolved the assembly, and
resolved to reign without Parliament. This, however, was not possible, for
the king needed funds that only Parliament could vote in. But the king was
exasperated, and took ever harsher measures. When the archbishop of
Canterbury sought to mediate the situation, the king practically deprived
him of his powers, and transferred them to a commission presided over by
William Laud, one of the most bitter opponents of Puritanism. Repeatedly,
Charles convened Parliament, only to dissolve it when the House of
Commons insisted on dealing with their grievances before voting on
funding. Charles rewarded those among the Commons who supported him
by making them lords, thus further depriving himself of what little support
he had in the lower chamber. Even the lords began turning against the king,
begrudging the honors granted to commoners who had done little more than
support him in parliamentary debate. When, in 1629, Charles dissolved the
third Parliament of his reign, he was resolved to rule by himself, and it was
only eleven years later that he finally felt constrained to convene Parliament
anew.
    Those eleven years of personal rule brought prosperity to the higher
classes. But the rise in prices was much more rapid than the rise in wages,
and therefore the majority of the population felt economically oppressed
while the powerful grew richer. In order to obtain the funds he required,
Charles made ever greater concessions to the aristocracy, who in turn
oppressed the poor. Although the king did show some interest in the plight
of the poor and took some measures to improve their situation, the fact was
that the social and political order caused more suffering than the king’s
weak measures could alleviate. Increasingly, and particularly in industrial
areas, the king and the bishops, who gave his cause religious sanction, were
seen as enemies of the people. The Puritans, who attacked the excesses of
the crown and of the bishops and the luxury and idolatry of the “new
Jezebel,” were rapidly gaining popular support.
    In 1633, William Laud was made archbishop of Canterbury. He was
enamored with the beauty and stateliness of Anglican worship, and a firm
believer in the need for religious uniformity for the good of the state. His
measures against the Puritans were both harsh and cruel, including death
warrants and orders of mutilation. Enthused by such zealous support,
Charles gave Laud full powers in Scotland, on whose Presbyterian church
the archbishop tried to impose the Anglican liturgy. This resulted in a riot
that soon grew into a rebellion. When the General Assembly of the Church
of Scotland tried to limit the power of bishops, the king’s agents declared it
dissolved. But the Assembly refused to obey the royal command, and
responded by abolishing the episcopacy and reorganizing the Church of
Scotland on a Presbyterian basis.
    This made war inevitable. The king had neither a sufficiently large army
nor the funds to keep one in the field, and turned for support to his Irish
subjects, who had strong Catholic sentiments, hoping that the queen’s
Catholic faith would encourage them to come to his aid. This brought
Scottish Calvinists and English Puritans closer together. In 1640, Charles
called a meeting of Parliament hoping to obtain funds for his war against
the Scottish rebels. But it soon became clear that many in the Commons had
less sympathy for the king than for his enemies, and Charles dissolved the
assembly—thereafter called the Short Parliament. Encouraged by this turn
of events, the Scots invaded English territory, and the king’s troops fled in
disorder. Once again, Charles was forced to convene Parliament. Thus
began the Long Parliament, which would be of great importance to the
history of England.

                         THE LONG PARLIAMENT
The years immediately preceding the first meeting of the Long Parliament
had been marred by economic difficulties. Social and economic upheavals,
which until then had affected the poor and the proletariat almost
exclusively, now began having a negative impact on the bourgeoisie.
Therefore, the majority of those elected to the House of Commons of the
new Parliament represented those who were discontent with the king’s
policies, if not for religious motives, then for others of an economic nature.
Since many of the nobility had joined the bourgeoisie by investing in
mercantile enterprises, many in the House of Lords were willing to join the
Commons in limiting the king’s power. Thus, the new Parliament proved
even more intractable than the previous one. The king had convened it so
that it could vote the necessary funds for raising an army and expelling the
Scottish rebels from English territory. But the members of Parliament knew
that their power resided precisely in the threat of the rebels, and were
therefore in no hurry to deal with that issue. First, they adopted a series of
measures against those who, in recent years, had sought to destroy
Puritanism. Those of Archbishop Laud’s victims who were still alive were
set free, and an indemnization was paid for their suffering. Lord Strafford,
one of the king’s most loyal ministers, was brought to trial before
Parliament and condemned to death, while the king did little or nothing to
save him.
     Charles I continued his father’s policies and eventually lost both his throne and his life.

   Then Parliament took steps to ensure that its measures would have
permanent value. In May 1641, it passed a law establishing that the
assembly could not be dissolved by the king without its own agreement.
Although that law deprived him of an important prerogative, the king did
not oppose it, but rather hoped that his problems would be solved by a
series of complicated intrigues. When Parliament finally began discussing
the matter of funds to deal with the Scottish rebels, it was discovered that
the king had been negotiating with the invaders, hoping to undo the power
of Parliament. A Catholic rebellion in Ireland was also said to have been
instigated by the queen, supposedly to embarrass Parliament and force it to
grant funds to the king for his armies. The sovereigns’ duplicity, whether
real or fictitious, drew the more radical Protestants into a closer alliance
with those whose goal was to limit the power of the crown.
    The bishops, as members of the House of Lords, were Charles’s main
supporters in Parliament. But the House of Commons began instituting
proceedings against some of the bishops, and when the accused tried to
attend Parliament the people of London rioted and barred them from the
Assembly. Encouraged by these events, the more radical members of the
House of Commons announced their plans to bring the queen to trial for her
supposed participation in the events leading to rebellion in Ireland. Such
extreme measures provoked a reaction against the Puritans. Many in the
House of Lords were convinced that the time had come to restore order.
Time was on the king’s side. But he did not have the patience to wait for
events to present him with victory, and therefore he hastily accused the
leaders of the Commons before the House of Lords. The lords, fearing that
some day he might take similar action against them, rejected the accusation.
Then the king ordered the arrest of the accused, and Parliament refused to
surrender them. The following day, a military contingent sent by Charles to
arrest those whom he had accused found that Parliament had the support of
the people of London, who refused to allow the arrest of the accused.
Having lost his capital, the king withdrew to his palaces, Hampton Court
and Windsor. Meanwhile, in London, the leader of the rebellious
Parliament, John Pym, ruled as a “king without a crown.” The Commons
then proposed a law excluding the bishops from the House of Lords. The
higher chamber agreed, the king did not object, and the prelates were
therefore expelled. Thus began a process that would progressively exclude
from Parliament those opposed to Puritanism, giving the assembly an ever-
more-radical bent. Parliament then ordered that a militia be recruited. Since
such troops would fall under Parliament’s command, the king decided that
the time had come for decisive action. He gathered the troops loyal to him,
and prepared for battle against Parliament’s militia. The conflicts between
the throne and Parliament had finally led to civil war.

                              CIVIL WAR
Both sides began building up their armies. Charles found his greatest
support among the nobility, while Parliament found its support among those
who had most suffered in recent times. The bulk of its army came from the
lower classes, to whom were added many merchants and a few noblemen.
The king’s strength was his cavalry, traditionally the specialty of the
nobility; Parliament’s was its infantry and the navy, for which trade was
important. At first there were only minor skirmishes, while each party
sought outside support: Parliament from the Scots, and Charles from the
Catholics in Ireland. Also, threatened by civil war, the various Puritan
factions drew closer together.
    In its efforts to attract the Scots, Parliament took a series of measures
that leaned toward Presbyterianism. Not all English Puritans agreed that this
was the proper type of church government, but most rejected the
episcopacy, considered the king’s main ecclesiastical support. Eventually,
the episcopacy was abolished—partly because the bishops supported the
king, partly for theological reasons, and partly because the confiscation of
the bishops’ property meant that Parliament could obtain funds without
creating new taxes.
    Meanwhile, Parliament convoked a body of theologians to advise it on
religious matters. This was the famous Westminster Assembly, which
included, besides 121 ministers and thirty laymen appointed by Parliament,
eight representatives from Scotland. Since the Scots had behind them the
strongest army in Great Britain, their influence on the assembly was
decisive. In Chapter 21 we shall dwell on the theology of the assembly,
whose Confession became one of the fundamental documents of Calvinist
orthodoxy. For the present, it suffices to say that, although some of its
members were independents—that is, supporters of the congregational form
of government—and others leaned toward episcopacy, the Assembly opted
for the Presbyterian form of government, and recommended that Parliament
adopt it for the Church of England. There were in Parliament many
independents who would have preferred another form of government, but
the course of war forced them to join with the Scots in a Solemn League
and Covenant that committed them to Presbyterianism. This was finally
enacted in 1644, and in the following year William Laud—by then
archbishop of Canterbury—was executed by order of Parliament.
    It was at this time, while Parliament was building up its army, that
Oliver Cromwell came to the forefront. He was a relatively wealthy man,
descended from one of Henry VIII’s advisors. A few years earlier he had
become a Puritan, and was now an avid reader of Scripture. He was
convinced that every decision, both personal and political, ought to be
based on the will of God. This meant that, although he was often slow in
coming to a decision, once he had set upon a course he was determined to
follow it through to its final conclusions. Although he was respected by his
fellow Puritans, until the time of the Civil War he was known as simply one
more member of the House of Commons. However, when he became
convinced that armed conflict was inevitable, Cromwell returned to his
home, where he recruited a small corps of cavalry. He knew that the cavalry
was the king’s main weapon, and that Parliament would need a similar
body. His zeal was contagious, and his small cadre became a mighty
cavalry, who charged into battle singing psalms, convinced that it was
waging holy war. Soon the entire army of Parliament was possessed of
similar convictions, and became an irresistible force that crushed the king’s
army at the Battle of Naseby.




 Oliver Cromwell, at first an obscure member of Parliament, led the rebels to victory and became
                                       master of England.
   That battle was the beginning of the end for the king. The rebels
captured his camp, where they found proof that he had been encouraging
foreign Catholic troops to invade England. Charles then decided to
negotiate with the Scots, hoping to win them with his promises. But the
Scots took him prisoner and eventually turned him over to Parliament.
Having thus won the war, Parliament adopted a series of Puritan measures,
including ordering that the Lord’s Day be reserved for religious
observances, and forbidding frivolous pastimes.
   But the Puritans, who had been united in their opposition to the king and
his bishops, were deeply divided among themselves. The majority of
Parliament by then supported the Presbyterian form of government, which
would allow for a national church without bishops. But the Independents
were the majority in the army. These Independents did not agree among
themselves on many points. But they did agree that a national church with a
Presbyterian form of government would deprive them of their freedom to
obey the Bible as they understood it. Thus, tension grew between
Parliament and its army. In 1646, Parliament tried without success to
dissolve the army. More radical groups, such as the “Fifth Monarchy” and
the “Levellers,” gained ground in the army. Some of them declared that the
Lord was about to return, and that it was necessary to transform the social
order by establishing justice and equality. Parliament, where the merchant
class still possessed significant power, responded with stricter measures
against the army, which in turn responded by declaring that, since it
included a wider representation of the people, it was the army, and not
Parliament, that had the right to speak for the nation.
   At that point, the king escaped. He then opened negotiations with the
Scots, with the army, and with Parliament, making mutually contradictory
promises to all three. He gained the support of the Scots, to whom he
promised the establishment of Presbyterianism in both Scotland and in
England. Meanwhile, he continued secret negotiation with Parliament. But
the Puritan army defeated the Scots, captured the king, and began a purge of
Parliament. Forty-five leaders of Parliament were arrested, and many more
were prevented from attending the sessions, while others refused to attend.
What now remained was rightly called by its enemies the Rump Parliament,
meaning that all that was left was the “rump” of a real parliament.
   It was this Rump Parliament that then initiated proceedings against
Charles, whom they accused of high treason and of having involved the
country in civil war. The fourteen lords who dared appear for the meeting of
the House of Lords unanimously refused to agree to such proceedings. But
the Commons simply continued the trial, and Charles, who refused to
defend himself on the grounds that his judges had no legal jurisdiction, was
beheaded on January 30, 1649.

                          THE PROTECTORATE
The Scots, fearing the loss of their independence from England, rapidly
acknowledged the dead king’s son, Charles II, as their ruler. The Irish
seized the opportunity to rebel. In England itself, the independent Puritans
were splintering. Among the more radical, the “Diggers” grew strong. This
was a movement that advocated a new social order in which the right to
property would be universal. Such preaching threatened the merchant class,
which earlier had supported Parliament in its opposition to the king.
Meanwhile, the Presbyterians insisted on a national church, which the
Independents saw as tyranny. In short, chaos threatened the land.
    It was then that Cromwell took the reins of power. Although he had not
participated in the purge of Parliament, he approved of its results and, in the
name of the Rump Parliament, stamped out first the Irish Rebellion and
then the royalist outbreak in Scotland. Charles II was forced to flee to the
Continent. Then Cromwell decided to do what the king had been unable to
do: when the Rump Parliament began discussing a law that would
perpetuate its power, Cromwell appeared at the session, expelled the few
remaining representatives, and locked the building. Thus, seemingly against
his own will, he had become master of the nation. For some time he sought
to return to some sort of representative government, but he eventually took
the title of “Lord Protector.” In theory, he was to rule with the help of a
Parliament that would include representatives from England, Scotland, and
Ireland. In truth, however, the new Parliament was mostly English, and
Cromwell was the real government.
    Cromwell then set out on a program of reformation of both church and
state. Given the prevailing atmosphere, his religious policies were fairly
tolerant. Although he was an Independent, he tried to develop a religious
system with room for Presbyterians, Baptists, and even some moderate
advocates of episcopacy. As a true Puritan, he also tried to reform the
customs of the land through legislation regarding the Lord’s Day, horse
races, cockfights, theater, and so forth. His economic policies favored the
middle class, to the particular detriment of the aristocracy but also, in some
measure, of the poor. Among both the very wealthy and the very poor,
opposition to the Protectorate increased.
   Cromwell was able to retain control of the country as long as he lived.
But his dreams of creating a stable republic failed. Like the kings before
him, he was unable to get along with Parliament—even though his partisans
forcibly kept his opponents from taking their seats, thus creating a new
“rump.” Since the Protectorate was obviously temporary, Cromwell was
offered the royal crown, but he refused it, still hoping to create a republic.
In 1658, shortly before his death, he named his son Richard as his
successor. But this younger Cromwell lacked his father’s ability, and
resigned his post.

                            THE RESTORATION
The failure of the Protectorate left no alternative but the restoration of the
monarchy. Under General Monck’s leadership, Parliament recalled Charles
II to his father’s throne. This brought about a reaction against the Puritans.
Although Charles at first sought to find a place for Presbyterians within the
national church, the new Parliament opposed such projects, and preferred
the traditional episcopacy. Thus, the new government restored both the
episcopacy and the Book of Common Prayer, and issued laws against
dissidents, for whom there was no place in the official church. Such laws,
however, were unable to stamp out most of the movements that had
emerged during the previous period of unrest. They continued to exist
outside the law until, late in that century, toleration was decreed.
    In Scotland, the consequences of the restoration were more severe. That
country had become staunchly Presbyterian, and now by royal decree the
episcopacy was reinstated, and the ministers of Presbyterian persuasion
were deposed in favor of others who were willing to preach in support of
bishops and the Book of Common Prayer. This resulted in riots and revolts.
Archbishop James Sharp, the foremost prelate of Scotland, was murdered.
This brought about intervention by the English in support of the Scottish
royalists, and the Presbyterian rebellions were drowned in blood.
    On his deathbed, Charles II declared himself a Catholic, thus confirming
the suspicions of many of the persecuted Puritans and Scottish
Presbyterians. His brother and successor, James II, resolved to restore
Roman Catholicism as the official religion of his kingdoms. In England, he
sought to gain the support of dissidents by decreeing religious tolerance.
But the anti-Catholic sentiments among the dissidents ran so strong that
they preferred no tolerance to the risk of a rebirth of Catholicism.
Conditions in Scotland were much worse, for James II—James VII of
Scotland—placed Catholics in positions of power, and decreed the death
penalty for any who attended unauthorized worship.
    After three years under James II, the English rebelled and invited
William, Prince of Orange, and his wife Mary, James’s daughter, to occupy
the throne. William landed in 1688, and James fled to France. In Scotland
his supporters held on for a few months, but by the following year William
and Mary were firmly in possession of the Scottish crown as well. Their
religious policy was fairly tolerant. In England, tolerance was granted to
any who would subscribe to the Thirty-nine Articles of 1562, and swear
loyalty to the sovereigns. Those who refused to swear, called non-jurors,
were granted tolerance as long as they did not conspire against the
sovereigns. In Scotland, Presbyterianism became the official religion of the
state, and the Westminster Confession its doctrinal norm.
    Even after the restoration, however, the Puritan ideal lingered on, and
deeply influenced the British ethos. Its two great literary figures, John
Bunyan and John Milton, long remained among the most read of English
authors. Bunyan’s most famous work, generally known by the abbreviated
title of Pilgrim’s Progress, became a popular book of devotion, and the
subject of much meditation and discussion for generations to come. And
Milton’s Paradise Lost determined the way in which the majority of the
English-speaking world read and interpreted the Bible.
                                     19

                     Catholic Orthodoxy


   There is sufficient light for those who wish to see, and sufficient
   darkness for those of the opposite disposition. Enough clarity to
   illumine the elect, and enough darkness to keep them humble.
   Sufficient darkness to blind the reprobate, and sufficient clarity to
   condemn them and make them inexcusable.


BLAISE PASCAL

The Council of Trent had determined Catholic orthodoxy for the next four
centuries, and had also put forth an entire program of reformation. But both
that orthodoxy and that reformation had opponents within Catholic ranks.
First of all, the Tridentine program of reformation was based on a
centralization of power in the papacy, and therefore conflicted with various
governments. Second, there were prelates for whom the proposed
reformation required sacrifices they were not willing to make. And, finally,
there were those who feared that, in its efforts to reject Protestantism, Trent
had gone too far, particularly by neglecting Augustine’s doctrine of the
primacy of grace in human salvation.

      GALLICANISM AND OPPOSITION TO PAPAL POWER
Although the Council of Trent had been necessary because the papacy had
lacked the will and the power to respond to the challenges of the Protestant
Reformation, by the end of its sessions the papacy had gained in prestige
and was entrusted with great power over the entire Catholic Church. But
this decision on the Council’s part was not well-received in many European
courts. This was a time of growing nationalism and absolute monarchs, and
therefore both kings and nationalists opposed the notion of a centralized
church under papal authority. Such attitudes were given the name
Gallicanism—from Gaul, or ancient France—because it was in France that
they became most powerful. Those who defended the authority of the pope
were called Ultramontanes, for they looked for authority beyond the
mountains—that is, beyond the Alps.
    During the late Middle Ages, when the papacy existed under the shadow
of France, the French monarchy had obtained a number of concessions from
popes, mostly granting the French church a measure of autonomy. Now the
French insisted on those ancient “freedoms of the Gallican church,” denied
by the centralizing edicts of Trent. While some of the Gallicans opposed the
centralization of power in the papacy for political reasons, others did so
because they were convinced that ecclesiastical authority resided in the
bishops, and not in the pope. In any case, the decrees of Trent would not be
valid in France until the crown had them promulgated, and this was not
easily achieved. Although Henry IV, after protracted negotiations, agreed to
the promulgation of the Council’s decrees, the French Parliament blocked
it. In 1615, five years after the assassination of Henry IV, the decrees still
had not been promulgated by French civil authorities, and the French
clergy, at that time dominated by the Ultramontanes, decided to do it on its
own. But the very fact that it had been the French clergy who had validated
the Council in their country would eventually be used as an argument by the
defenders of the “Gallican freedoms.”
    There were similar movements in other parts of Europe. Febronianism
was named after Justin Febronius, the pseudonymous author of a book
published in 1763 under the title The State of the Church and the Legitimate
Power of the Roman Pontiff. This argued that the church is the community
of the faithful, and that the bishops, as their representatives, are to rule the
church. Therefore, final authority resides in a council of the bishops, and
not in the pope. Pope Clement XIII condemned Febronius’s work as
heretical. But its ideas continued circulating and gaining popularity. Some
saw in them the possibility of reuniting Catholics and Protestants by means
of a council. Others supported them because they were compatible with
their own nationalism. And there were some opulent bishops, lords of vast
dioceses, who supported them as a means to evade compliance with the
reforms dictated by Rome.
    In the imperial court at Vienna, Febronianism took a different turn. The
emperor, Joseph II, was a learned and liberal-minded ruler who projected a
number of reforms in his territories. He needed the support of the church for
such projects; but not of the Tridentine Church, which he considered
obscurantist and intolerant. Therefore he took over the education of the
clergy, closed down those monasteries he deemed too traditional, founded
new churches, and in general carried forth a reformation of the church in
the direction he thought best. Other rulers showed an inclination to follow
the emperor’s example, and the Church of Rome, which had already
condemned Febronianism in 1764, also condemned Josephism in 1794. But
it was not papal condemnation, but rather the French Revolution (to which
we shall turn later) that put an end to this and other such movements.
   The enmity of the house of Bourbon led to the expulsion of the Jesuits from France and other
                                      Bourbon territories.

    Meanwhile, papal power had suffered a serious blow in the dissolution
of the Jesuits. That order, founded precisely to serve as an army for the
papacy, was not well regarded by the absolutist monarchs of the eighteenth
century. The Jesuits’ support of the intolerant policies that led to the Thirty
Years’ War did not help their popularity. In particular, the house of Bourbon
had a profound aversion toward the Jesuits, who had consistently supported
the rival house of Hapsburg. Therefore, as the power of the Bourbons
waxed, and that of the Hapsburgs waned, the Jesuits found themselves in
difficulty. In 1758, an attempt to assassinate Joseph I of Portugal was
blamed on the Jesuits. A year later, the Society of Jesus was expelled from
Portugal and its colonies, and the crown confiscated its property. In France,
also under Bourbon rule, the Society was suppressed in 1764. Three years
later, it was expelled from Spain and its colonies by Charles III. Then King
Ferdinand IV of Naples followed the example of his father, Charles III of
Spain. This led to a concerted effort by the Bourbons to rid themselves of
the Jesuits, not only in their own territories, but also throughout the world.
Early in 1769, the Bourbon ambassadors in Rome presented to the pope a
joint resolution in which they demanded the dissolution of the Jesuits.
Finally, in 1773, Pope Clement XIV ordered the Society of Jesus dissolved,
thus losing one of the most powerful instruments of papal policy.
    Gallicanism, Febronianism, Josephism, and the suppression of the
Jesuits show that, while the popes insisted on their universal jurisdiction, in
truth they were losing power and authority.

                               JANSENISM
The Council of Trent had categorically condemned the views of Luther and
Calvin on grace and predestination; but there were many who feared that, in
an extreme reaction against Protestantism, this could lead to a denial of St.
Augustine’s teachings. Thus arose among Catholics a series of
controversies over grace and predestination.
   Later in the sixteenth century, the Jesuits at the University of Salamanca,
under the leadership of Luis de Molina, affirmed that predestination was
based on God’s foreknowledge. To this the Dominican Domingo Báñez, one
of the best Catholic theologians of the time, responded that such teaching
was contrary to Augustine, and therefore ought to be condemned. Each side
accused the other before the Spanish Inquisition, the Jesuits declaring that
the Dominicans were Calvinists, and the Dominicans claiming that the
Jesuits were Pelagians. The Inquisition turned the matter over to Rome, and
the popes, after long hesitation, simply decided that both accusations were
false, and ordered each side to refrain from attacking the other.
    Similar controversies at the University of Louvain had greater
repercussions. There, Michael Baius proposed theses similar to those of
Augustine, arguing that a sinful will can produce no good, and that
therefore only grace, and not the human will, can produce repentance and
conversion. In 1567, Pope Pius V condemned seventy-nine theses drawn
from Baius’s writings. The latter recanted, but continued teaching very
similar doctrine. When a Jesuit theologian attacked Baius, the faculty of
Louvain responded by declaring that the Jesuit was a Pelagian. Again, the
popes intervened, trying to calm spirits. But Baius’s theology continued
circulating in Louvain and resurfaced six decades later, in 1640, in the work
of Cornelius Jansenius. His book, Augustine, published posthumously,
claimed to be no more than a study and exposition of the teachings of that
great theologian on the subjects of grace and predestination. But what
Jansenius found in Augustine was too similar to the doctrines of Calvin and,
in 1643, his theses were condemned by Pope Urban VIII.
    This, however, did not put an end to the controversy. In France, the
Jansenist torch was taken up by Jean Duvergier, better known as Saint-
Cyran because he was abbot of a house by that name, and by the nuns of the
abbey of Port-Royal. The abbey of Port-Royal, under the leadership of the
saintly Mother Angelique, had become a center of devotion and
reformation, and Saint-Cyran was well known as a leading figure in that
movement. He had been imprisoned by Richelieu, who feared that the
religious zeal of these reformers would hinder his political program. Freed
in 1643, the same year that the theses of his deceased friend Jansenius were
condemned, Saint-Cyran became the champion of Jansenism, and its
headquarters the abbey of Port-Royal. Now, however, Jansenism was less a
doctrine regarding grace and predestination, and more a movement of
zealous religious reform. The Jesuits had proposed the theory of
probabilism, which meant that a probability, no matter how slight, that an
action was correct made it morally acceptable. To the French Jansenists this
was moral indifferentism, and instead they proposed a life of such discipline
and rigor that it was said that the nuns of Port-Royal were “as pure as
angels and as proud as demons.”
    Saint-Cyran died shortly after being freed, but the cause was taken up by
Antoine Arnauld, Mother Angelique’s brother, and by the philosopher
Blaise Pascal. From an early age, Pascal had shown his genius, particularly
in physics and mathematics. When he was thirty-one, eight years before his
death, he converted to Jansenism. For him this was a profound religious
experience that left its mark on the rest of his life. When the faculty of the
Sorbonne condemned Arnauld, he published the first of his twenty
Provincial Letters, purporting to be addressed to the Parisian Jesuits by an
inhabitant of the provinces. Their humor and wit soon gained them wide
circulation, and they were added to the index of forbidden books. For a
time, it became fashionable among the intelligentsia and the aristocracy of
Paris to be a Jansenist.
    Then reaction set in. Louis XIV was not a king to tolerate such zeal,
which could easily turn into sectarianism. The assembly of the clergy
condemned the movement. The nuns of Port-Royal were disbanded. In spite
of his Gallicanism, Louis XIV asked for the support of Pope Alexander III,
who ordered all members of the clergy to repudiate Jansenism. But once
again the pendulum swung. Alexander died, his successor proved more
lenient, the nuns were allowed to return to Port-Royal, and there was even
talk of making Arnauld a cardinal. This, however, was only a brief respite.
Eventually, Arnauld was forced into exile, where he died. Louis XIV
became increasingly intolerant, and Pope Clement XI reiterated the
condemnation of Jansenism. In 1709, the police took possession of Port-
Royal and expelled the elderly nuns. Since people still flocked in
pilgrimage to the abbey’s cemetery, it was ordered dug up, and it is said that
dogs fought over the disinterred remains. In 1713, Clement XI categorically
condemned Jansenism in the bull Unigenitus.
  One of the ablest defenders of Jansenism was Balise Pascal, whose Provincial Letters made the
                              Parisian Jesuits the subject of ridicule.

    Jansenism continued its existence, and even grew. By then, however, it
had little to do with the teachings of Jansenius, or with the reforming zeal of
Saint-Cyran and Angelique, or even with the profound religiosity of Pascal.
It was rather a political and intellectual movement closely akin to
Gallicanism. Some members of the lower clergy joined the movement as a
protest against the opulence of their superiors. Others used it as a means of
opposing undue interference of Rome in French affairs. Still others were
rationalists who saw in the movement a reaction against dogmatic authority.
Eventually, Jansenism disappeared, not because it had been condemned and
persecuted, but rather because it had become amorphous.

                              QUIETISM
Another major controversy within Catholicism revolved around Quietism.
This doctrine began with the publication in 1675 of a Spiritual Guide
written by the Spaniard Miguel de Molinos. He was a controversial man
whom some called a saint, and others a charlatan. His Spiritual Guide, and
a later Treatise on Daily Communion, caused a great stir, for some accused
him of heresy, while others claimed that his was the highest form of
Christian devotion.
    Molinos advocated total passivity before God. A believer is simply to
disappear, to die, and be lost in God. Any activism, be it of the body or of
the soul, must be set aside. Contemplation must be purely spiritual, having
nothing to do with any physical or visible means—including the humanity
of Christ. The same is true of ascetic discipline, which is another form of
activism. When the soul is lost in contemplation of the divine, it must
consider nothing else—not even the neighbor.
    Such teaching provoked great opposition. Some argued that it was more
akin to Muslim mysticism than to the doctrines of the great Christian
teachers. Others pointed out that Molinism led to privatism, in which the
church has no importance or authority, and in which Christians have
nothing to do with political or social life. The Inquisition, asked to judge on
the matter, at first supported Molinos. But many confessors protested that
this teaching was leading to moral laxity among the faithful. Then rumors
circulated that Molinos himself encouraged such laxity among his
followers, and that his relations with the women among them were not
above reproach.
    In 1685, Molinos and several of his followers were arrested by papal
order. In his trial before the Inquisition, he refused to defend himself, even
from the most absurd accusations. His admirers declared that he was simply
practicing the Quietism that he had preached. His accusers said that his
silence proved his guilt. When ordered to recant, he did so with such
humility that the recantation itself could be interpreted as a sign that he was
still true to his beliefs. Although many demanded that he be condemned to
death, Pope Innocent XI, not wishing to create a martyr for Quietism, had
him imprisoned for the remaining eleven years of his life. In prison, he
seems to have continued the life of quiet contemplation that he had
advocated.
    Quietism penetrated France, where it was taken up by the widowed
Madame de Guyon and by her confessor, Father Lacombe. Both were
people of profound religious inclinations, given to visions and other
mystical experiences. Around them gathered a circle of believers whom
they guided in their religious lives. When Madame de Guyon published a
treatise, A Short and Simple Means of Prayer, her fame extended throughout
the nation. Then she and her confessor moved to Paris, where their admirers
included several women of the highest aristocracy.
    But Madame de Guyon’s doctrines were not above suspicion, for she
carried the teachings of Molinos in a more radical direction. She eventually
declared that there may be times when, in order to offer God a true
sacrifice, one must commit sins one truly despises. Such affirmations,
joined with her close collaboration with Lacombe, gave rise to evil rumors,
and the archbishop of Paris ordered the priest put in prison, and Madame de
Guyon placed in a convent. Lacombe was carried from one prison to
another, until he lost his mind and died. Madame de Guyon was eventually
freed through the intervention of one of the king’s favorites.
    It was then that Madame de Guyon met the young Bishop François
Fénelon. He was won over to her teachings, although he never carried them
to her extremes. Eventually, the issue of Quietism degenerated into a bitter
controversy between Fénelon and one of the greatest French theologians of
the time, Jacques Benigne Bossuet. The controversy dragged on, for
Bossuet had the support of the king, but Fénelon was a man of admirable
piety. Finally, under pressure from Louis XIV, Pope Innocent XII agreed to
reject some of Fénelon’s theses, although carefully declaring, not that they
were wrong, but that they could lead some to error. Upon hearing of the
papal decision, Fénelon responded with such humility that in the public
mind Bossuet was condemned as an arrogant man who had unnecessarily
humiliated a worthy colleague. Fénelon then withdrew to his pastoral duties
as archbishop of Cambray, distributing all his possessions among the poor
and leading such an admirable life that he was the probable model for
Victor Hugo’s saintly but fictitious Monseigneur Myriel, a leading figure in
Les Miserables.
    All these events and controversies show that during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries Roman Catholicism was reorganizing itself after the
crisis of the Reformation. The Council of Trent had strictly defined Catholic
orthodoxy, and in theory the papacy had become the center of ecclesiastical
power. In doctrinal matters, the decisions of Trent were inviolable, and
therefore all theological controversy took place within the framework of
Tridentine orthodoxy. But there were also strong political forces at work
against the centralization of ecclesiastical power, thus giving rise to
Gallicanism, Febronianism, and Josephism. That opposition to papal power
would eventually weaken the Catholic Church and make it more difficult
for it to respond to the challenges of the French Revolution.
                                    20

                   Lutheran Orthodoxy


   I am a Christian, profoundly committed to the Confession of
   Augsburg in which my parents reared me. And I am also committed
   to it as a result of my constantly renewed and considered reflexions,
   and of a daily struggle against every sort of temptation.


PAUL GERHARDT

The reform that Luther advocated and began was doctrinal, and not merely
practical. Although he criticized the corruption that had become common in
the life of the church, that was not the main point at issue. Luther’s
reformation began with a theological discovery, and he was always
convinced that correct belief was of crucial importance for the church. This
did not mean that all had to agree on all points of doctrine. For many years,
his main collaborator and closest friend was Philipp Melanchthon, who
differed from him on many points. Luther himself said that his task was
cutting down the trees and removing the great boulders from the field, and
that Melanchthon was the more patient man whose task was to plow and
sow. Likewise, although later the differences between Calvin and Luther
have been underscored, when the German reformer read the first edition of
Calvin’s Institutes he commented favorably on them. But not all had the
same mental amplitude, as became evident in the debates that divided the
next generation of Lutherans.

               PHILIPPISTS AND STRICT LUTHERANS
After Luther’s death, Melanchthon took his place as the main interpreter of
Lutheran theology. His systematic exposition of theology, commonly
known by the abbreviated title of Loci theologici, became the standard
textbook for the study of theology among Lutherans, and underwent several
editions, each with further revisions by its author. But there were those who
thought that Melanchthon was not a faithful exponent of the deceased
reformer’s theology. The main point of contrast, at the heart of all other
differences, was the humanist inclination of “Master Philip”—as Luther
used to call him. When Luther broke with Erasmus and his humanist
program of reformation, Melanchthon continued cordial relations with the
illustrious scholar. This was partly due to Melanchthon’s love of peace. But
it was also due to his disagreement with Luther’s radical rejection of “dirty
reason.” For similar reasons Melanchthon, while affirming the doctrine of
justification by faith, insisted on the need for good works—although not as
a means of salvation but as a result and witness to it.
  The first debates among Lutherans revolved around the teachings of Melanchthon, whom some
              accused of having departed from the teachings of the deceased reformer.

    These differences between Luther and Melanchthon, exaggerated by
some after Luther’s death, gave rise to the debate between Philippists and
strict Lutherans. The immediate occasion for the conflict was the Augsburg
Interim, an attempt to force Lutherans to agree to a compromise with
Catholics (see Chapter 9). None of the Lutheran leaders was enthusiastic
about the Interim, and most refused to sign it. But imperial pressure was
great, and finally the Wittenberg theologians, headed by Melanchthon,
agreed to a modified version of it—the Leipzig Interim. The strict
Lutherans, who had firmly refused to sign the Interim in spite of the
displeasure of the emperor, accused the Wittenberg Philippists of having
forsaken several elements of Luther’s teachings. Melanchthon responded by
establishing a distinction between the central elements of the gospel and
those that are peripheral to it. He called the latter by the Greek name
adiaphora. The essential must not be abandoned at any cost. The adiaphora,
although important, must not be confused with the essential. Therefore, in a
situation such as that which the church was facing at the time, one could be
justified in putting aside some of the secondary elements in order to have
the freedom to continue preaching and teaching the essential. The strict
Lutherans, under the leadership of Matthias Flacius, responded that,
although it may well be true that there are some elements essential to the
gospel, and others that are peripheral, there are circumstances that require a
clear confession of faith. At such times, some elements that could otherwise
be considered peripheral become symbols of the faith itself. To forsake
them is to deny the faith. Those who sincerely wish to give clear witness to
the faith refuse to yield even on peripheral matters, for fear that their
yielding may be construed as surrender. In accepting the Leipzig Interim,
Flacius argued, even if the Philippists had yielded only on peripheral
matters, they had refused to confess their faith.
    Then other issues were added to the debate. The strict Lutherans accused
the Philippists of giving too much credit to human participation in
salvation. Melanchthon, who had never agreed with Luther’s assertions
about the “enslaved will,” was indeed moving to a position that granted the
sinful human will greater freedom, and eventually came to speak of
collaboration among the Spirit, the Word, and human will. Opposing him,
the strict Lutherans emphasized the corruption of human nature as a result
of sin, and Flacius even came to affirm that the very nature of the fallen
humankind is corruption. At this time, the strict Lutherans also began
insisting on the contrast between Luther and Calvin in their interpretations
of the Lord’s presence in communion, and declared that, since
Melanchthon’s views were akin to Calvin’s, the Philippists were in truth
Calvinists.
    These and similar controversies eventually led to the Formula of
Concord of 1577. On most of the issues debated, this formula took an
intermediate position. However, it declared that while it is true that there are
some elements that are not essential to the gospel, in times of persecution
one should not abandon even these peripheral matters. Also on the matter of
communion, the Formula of Concord upheld the view of strict Lutherans,
denying any significant difference between Zwingli’s position, clearly
rejected by Luther at Marburg, and Calvin’s. As a result, from that point on
one of the characteristics of Lutheranism was its understanding of
communion, expressed in terms of contrast with Calvinism.

                   THE TRIUMPH OF ORTHODOXY
The period before the Formula of Concord was marked by the controversies
between Philippists and strict Lutherans, but the next generations set out to
coordinate Luther’s teachings with those of Melanchthon. This spirit was
already apparent in the Formula of Concord and in its main architect,
Martin Chemnitz, whose theology, while accepting many of the theses of
strict Lutheranism, followed a methodology similar to Melanchthon’s. For
Chemnitz, the task at hand was reconciling the various positions within
Lutheranism, while underscoring their differences from Catholicism as well
as with other forms of Protestantism.
    The theology that evolved out of this program has been called Lutheran
orthodoxy or Lutheran scholasticism. Since this had its counterpart in the
Reformed tradition, there is also a Calvinist or Reformed orthodoxy, to
which we shall turn in the next chapter. Both were characterized by their
attention to theological detail, seeking to clarify and discuss every possible
subject, by their reinstatement of Aristotle as a tool in theology—which
Luther had categorically rejected—and by a theological method in which
words from Scripture were used as building blocks with which one could
build vast theological systems. On this latter point, while Protestant
scholastic theologians—Lutheran as well as Reformed—rejected
rationalism, they emulated some of its methods.
    This form of scholasticism dominated Lutheran thought throughout the
seventeenth century and part of the eighteenth. Its main characteristic was
its emphasis on systematic thought. Luther never sought to develop a
system of theology. Melanchthon did write a short systematic work that
soon gained wide recognition. But the theologians of Protestant
scholasticism wrote vast systematic works that could be compared with the
great summas of medieval scholasticism, in both their size and their careful
distinctions and analyses. For instance, Johann Gerhardt’s great work
comprised nine volumes that by the second edition had become twenty-
three. And, from 1655 to 1677, Abraham Calovius published a systematic
theology in twelve volumes.
    A second characteristic of Protestant scholasticism that made it similar
to medieval theology was its use of Aristotle. Luther had declared that in
order to be a theologian one must be rid of Aristotle. But toward the end of
the sixteenth century there was a renewal of interest in Aristotelian
philosophy, and soon most Lutheran theologians were seeking to build their
systems on the basis of Aristotelian logic and metaphysics. Some even
began using the works of their Jesuit counterparts, who were also doing
theology on the basis of Aristotle. Thus, while in its content Protestant
scholasticism was radically opposed to Catholicism, in its tone and
methodology it was very similar to the Catholic theology of the time.
    The third reason why Lutheran theology in the seventeenth century is
properly called scholastic is that it was mostly the product of the schools. It
was no longer, as in the previous century, a theology born out of the life of
the church and directed toward preaching and the care of souls, but rather a
theology developed in the universities, and addressed to other scholars and
university professors.
    Although Protestant scholasticism waned toward the end of the
eighteenth century, it left two important legacies: its doctrine of scriptural
inspiration, and its spirit of rigid confessionalism. Luther had never dealt
specifically with the question of the inspiration of Scripture. There is no
doubt that he was convinced that the Bible was inspired by God, and that
this is the reason it must be the basis of every theological affirmation. But
he never discussed the nature of inspiration. For him, what was important
was not the text of Scripture itself, but the divine action to which that text
testifies. The Word of God is Jesus Christ, and the Bible is the Word of God
because it leads to him. But the scholastic Lutherans posed the question of
the manner and sense in which the Bible is inspired. Most answered that the
Holy Spirit both told the authors what to write and ordered them to write it.
This seemed necessary in order to refute the argument given by some
Catholics that the apostles told their disciples some things in writing, and
others verbally. According to the Lutheran scholastics, it does not matter
whether or not the apostles verbally taught the disciples things that are not
written in the Bible, for such teachings—if they did indeed exist—would
not have been inspired by God as the Bible was inspired. Only what the
Spirit told the apostles and prophets to write is authoritative for the church.
   The other important question that the Lutheran scholastics posed about
the inspiration of Scripture was the degree to which the individuality of the
authors determined what they wrote. The most common answer was that the
biblical authors were no more than secretaries or copyists for the Holy
Spirit. They wrote down, letter by letter, what the Spirit told them. But the
Spirit knew the individuality of each author and took it into account. That is
the reason why the Epistles of Paul, for instance, are different from those of
John. All this led to an emphasis on the literal inspiration of Scripture, even
on the divine inspiration of the text as it has been transmitted through the
centuries. On this point, it is noteworthy that, while Catholic theologians
were arguing that the Vulgate—the ancient Latin translation of the Bible—
was divinely inspired, there were Lutheran theologians who denied such
inspiration, but who then affirmed that the Holy Spirit had inspired the
medieval Jewish scholars who had added vowels to the Hebrew text of
Scripture—for Old Testament Hebrew had no vowels.

               GEORG CALIXTUS AND “SYNCRETISM”
The growing rigidity of Lutheran scholasticism was manifest in the
controversy surrounding the proposals of Georg Calixtus. He was a
convinced Lutheran who believed that, although Lutheran doctrine was the
best interpretation of Scripture, this did not suffice to declare all others
heretics or false Christians. He saw a denial of the very spirit of Christianity
in the controversies of his time, particularly in the bitter attacks of
Christians against other Christians. Therefore, he sought a rapprochement
with believers of other confessions, although one that would not lead to the
denial of his Lutheran convictions. In order to do this, he made a distinction
similar to Melanchthon’s between the essential and the secondary.
Everything that is in Scripture has been revealed by God, and ought to be
believed; but not all is of equal importance. Only that which relates to
salvation is fundamental and absolutely necessary. The rest is equally true,
and is also important, for otherwise God would not have revealed it. But it
is not essential for being a Christian. There is a difference between heresy
and error. The former is the denial of something that is essential for
salvation. The latter is a denial of another element of revelation. Both
heresy and error are evil, and should be avoided. But only heresy is of such
gravity as to keep Christians from communion with one another.
Rejected as a “syncretist” during his lifetime, Georg Calixtus was later hailed as a forerunner of the
                                   modern ecumenical movement.

    How, then, does one distinguish the fundamental from the secondary?
On the basis of what Calixtus calls “the consensus of the first five
centuries.” During those five centuries, Calixtus argued, there was a
consensus among Christians. Some positions were condemned as heretical,
and we ought to do likewise. But it would be folly to affirm that something
that cannot be found in those first five centuries of Christian theology is
essential for salvation. Such an assertion would lead to the conclusion that
no one was saved during the early centuries of the life of the church!
    Again, this does not mean that we are to believe only what can be found
in the writings of the first five centuries. On the contrary, we should believe
all that Scripture tells us. But lack of belief in something to be found in
Scripture and not in the first five centuries of Christian theology is error, not
heresy. The doctrine of justification by faith is a case in point. There is no
doubt that this doctrine is found in Scripture. But it was not part of the
common faith of the first five centuries. Therefore, although it is important,
it is not to be required of all, as if any who reject it are heretics. Luther was
right in affirming this doctrine, and Lutherans are also right in insisting on
its truth. But this does not mean that Catholics are heretics. And the same
can be said regarding the differences between Lutherans and Calvinists on
the manner of the presence of Christ in communion. Although Calvinists
are in error, they are not heretics.
    By using these arguments, Calixtus hoped to achieve better
understanding and mutual appreciation among Christians of different
confessions—and for this reason he has been rightly called a forerunner of
the ecumenical movement. But the defenders of Lutheran orthodoxy were
not to be swayed. Abraham Calovius emphatically declared that everything
that God has revealed in Scripture is absolutely necessary. Anyone who
denies or rejects any part of biblical doctrine, no matter how small or
seemingly insignificant, denies and rejects none other than God. Other
theologians would not go that far, but would point out that, in introducing
his theory of the consensus of the first five centuries, Calixtus had restored
to tradition the authority that Luther had denied it. Soon the proposal of
Calixtus came to be known as syncretism, falsely implying that he intended
to mix elements from various confessions, or that he believed all
confessions to be equally valid. It was only in Poland that Calixtus’s
proposal was tried out. There, King Wladyslaw IV tried to apply them by
opening a dialogue between Catholics and Protestants. But his efforts came
to naught, and Georg Calixtus was eventually forgotten.
    It was clear that the orthodox theologians of each confession were
becoming increasingly entrenched in their positions, as if only those who
agreed with them on every point of doctrine properly deserved to be called
Christians. Such dogmatism, while bolstering the conviction of some, also
gave rise to increasing doubts about the truth of Christianity, or at least
about the value of theology and doctrine.
                                     21

                   Reformed Orthodoxy


   Election is the immutable purpose of God whereby, before the
   foundation of the world, he chose, from among the entire human
   race, a certain number of people to be redeemed in Christ.


SYNOD OF DORT

During the seventeenth century, the Reformed tradition determined what
would thereafter be its orthodoxy. This took place in two solemn assemblies
whose pronouncements were seen as the most faithful expression of
Calvinism: the Synod of Dort and the Westminster Assembly.

             ARMINIANISM AND THE SYNOD OF DORT
Jacobus Arminius was a distinguished Dutch pastor and professor whose
theological training had been thoroughly Calvinistic, and had taken place
partly in Geneva, under the direction of Calvin’s successor Theodore Beza.
Having returned to Holland, he gained wide recognition through his
preaching from an important pulpit in Amsterdam. It was due to his good
name, and to his fame as a student of the Bible and theology, that the
leadership of the church in Amsterdam asked him to refute the opinions of
Dirck Koornhert, a theologian who rejected some aspects of Calvin’s
doctrine, particularly in the matter of predestination. With a view to refuting
Koornhert, Arminius studied his writings and compared them with
Scripture, with early Christian theology, and with the teachings of several of
the major reformers. Finally, after a struggle of conscience, he reached the
conclusion that Koornhert was right. Arminius became a professor at the
University of Leiden in 1603, and his opinions became a matter of public
debate. One of his colleagues, Francis Gomarus, was a firm believer in
predestination in the strictest sense, and soon the two clashed. It was thus
that Jacobus Arminius, who considered himself a true follower of Calvin,
gave his name to Arminianism, the doctrine that many since then have
considered the very antithesis of Calvinism.
    The issue between Gomarus and Arminius was not whether there is such
a thing as predestination. On that point they agreed, for both found
abundant biblical references to predestination. They debated the basis on
which predestination takes place. According to Arminius, predestination
was based on God’s foreknowledge of those who would later have faith in
Jesus Christ. Gomarus, on the other hand, claimed that faith itself is the
result of predestination, so that before the foundation of the world the
sovereign will of God decreed who would have faith and who would not.
Arminius responded that the great decree of predestination was the one by
which God determined that Jesus Christ would be the mediator and
redeemer of humankind. That was indeed a sovereign decree, in no way
dependent on human response. But the divine decree having to do with the
final destiny of each individual was based, not on the sovereign will of God,
but rather on divine foreknowledge, by which God knew what each
person’s response would be to the offer of salvation in Jesus Christ. In
almost every other matter, Arminius remained a strict Calvinist. His
doctrine of the church and the sacraments, for instance, followed the
general lines of Calvin. Therefore, although eventually it was his opponents
who came to be known as Calvinists, the truth is that the entire controversy
took place among Calvin’s followers. Arminius died in 1609, but his death
did not put an end to the debate, for the successor to his chair at Leiden held
his opinions, and carried on the controversy with Gomarus.
    Political and economic considerations were soon added to the
theological issues at stake. Although the struggle for independence from
Spain had been long and bitter, and independence was still not assured,
there were those in the Netherlands who wished to improve relations with
their former oppressor. These were mostly the merchants, who in some
cities were a true oligarchy, and who stood to gain from improved trade
with Spain. They were staunchly opposed by many of the clergy, who
feared that such contacts with Spain would corrupt the doctrinal purity of
the Dutch church. Those who did not participate in the prosperity brought
about by trade—that is, the lower classes, imbued with patriotism, with
Calvinism, and with resentment against the merchants—also opposed such
relations. Soon the mercantile oligarchy took the side of Arminius, while
their opponents supported Gomarus.
    In 1610, the Arminian party issued a document or Remonstrance, and
thereafter was commonly known as Remonstrants. The document itself
contains five articles dealing with the issues under debate. The first article
defines predestination in ambiguous terms, for it affirms that God
determined before the foundation of the world that those would be saved
who believe in Christ. We are not told whether this means, as Arminius
taught, that God knew who would believe, and predestined those particular
people; or simply that God determined that whoever would later come to
believe would be saved—what later came to be called the open decree of
predestination. In any case, this ambiguity is consistent with the final
paragraph of the Remonstrance, which declares that this is all that is needed
for salvation, and that “it is neither necessary nor useful to rise higher nor to
search any deeper.” In short, that needless speculation regarding the cause
of the divine decree of predestination is to be rejected. The second article
affirms that Jesus died for all human beings, although only believers
actually receive the benefits of his passion. The third attempts to deal with
the accusation of Pelagianism, leveled by Gomarus and his supporters
against Arminius and his followers. (The reader will remember that
Pelagianism was the doctrine that Augustine opposed, which held that
humans were capable of doing good on their own.) To make clear that they
were not Pelagians, the Remonstrants declared that humans can do nothing
good on their own account, and that the grace of God is necessary in order
to do good. But the fourth article rejects the conclusion drawn by both
Augustine and Gomarus, that grace is irresistible, saying, “As to the manner
in which this grace operates, it is not irresistible, for it is written that many
resisted the Holy Spirit.” Finally, the fifth article discusses whether or not
those who have believed in Christ can fall from grace. The Gomarists
argued that the power of predestination is such that those who have been
predestined to faith cannot lose the grace they have received. The
Remonstrants simply responded that biblical teaching on this point is not
clear, and that they would need clearer scriptural proof before committing
themselves in one direction or the other.
    A few years later, political circumstances took a turn against the
Remonstrants. Prince Maurice of Nassau—the son and heir of William of
Orange—who had refrained from intervening in the debate, took the side of
the Gomarists and of those who wished no contact with Spain. Johann van
Oldenbarnevelt (or simply Barnevelt), the leading figure in negotiations
with Spain, was imprisoned. His friend Hugo Grotius—best known for his
work on international law—was also arrested. As part of this reaction
against the mercantile party and the Arminians, the Dutch Estates General
convoked a great ecclesiastical assembly to put an end to the debate
between Gomarists and Remonstrants.
    That assembly, known as the Synod of Dort, met from November 1618
to May 1619. In calling it, the Estates General was seeking the support, not
only of Dutch Calvinists, but also of those in other parts of Europe.
Therefore, invitations were extended to other Reformed churches, and a
total of twenty-seven delegates attended from Great Britain, Switzerland,
and Germany (the French Huguenots were forbidden to attend by Louis
XIII). The Dutch were almost seventy, of which roughly half were ministers
and professors of theology, a quarter were lay elders, and the rest were
members of the Estates General. The first sessions of the synod were
devoted to administrative matters, including the order that a new Dutch
translation of the Bible be produced. But the main purpose of the gathering
was the condemnation of Arminianism, necessary in order to end the strife
that was dividing the Netherlands and to secure the support of other
Reformed churches. Thus, although the synod did not approve the most
extreme theses of Gomarus—who was one of its members—it did agree on
the need to condemn Arminianism.
    The canons of the Synod of Dort affirmed five doctrines the
Remonstrants could not accept, and from that point on those five doctrines
have become the hallmark of orthodox Calvinism. The first of these is the
doctrine of unconditional election. This means that the election of the
predestined is not based on God’s foreknowledge of each one’s response to
the offer of salvation, but only on the inscrutable will of God. The second is
limited atonement. The Remonstrants claimed that Christ had died for all
humankind. Against them, the Synod of Dort declared that he died only for
the elect. Third, the synod affirmed that, although there is still in fallen
humans a vestige of natural light, human nature has been so corrupted that
such light cannot be properly used. And this is true, not only in that which
refers to the knowledge of God and to conversion, but also in things “civil
and natural.” The fourth basic tenet of Dort is irresistible grace. And,
finally, the synod affirmed the perseverance of the saints, that is, that the
elect will persevere in grace, and cannot fall from it. Although such
perseverance is not the work of the believer, but of God, it should serve to
give us trust in our own salvation and steadfastness in doing good, even
though we see the power of sin still active in us. (It has become
commonplace among English-speaking students of theology to remember
these five points by thinking of the word tulip: T for total depravity, U for
unconditional election, L for limited atonement, I for irresistible grace, and
P for perseverance of the saints.)
    Immediately after the Synod of Dort, severe measures were taken
against the Remonstrants. Van Oldenbarnevelt was condemned to death,
and Hugo Grotius to life imprisonment—although shortly thereafter, with
his wife’s help, he managed to escape by hiding in a trunk supposedly full
of books. Almost a hundred Arminian ministers were ordered to leave the
country, and many others were deprived of their pulpits. Those who insisted
on preaching Arminianism were condemned to life imprisonment. The laity
who attended Arminian services had to pay heavy fines. Teachers were also
required to subscribe to the decisions of Dort. In some places, similar
statements were even required of church organists—one of whom was said
to have remarked that he did not know how to play the organ according to
the canons of Dort.
    Maurice of Nassau died in 1625, and after that time measures against the
Remonstrants were less rigorous. Finally, in 1631, they were granted
official tolerance. They then organized their own churches, many of which
continue to this day. The major impact of Arminianism, however, did not
take place through these churches, but rather through other groups and
movements—particularly the Methodists—that espoused it.
                   THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION
In Chapter 18 we examined the story of the events leading to the
convocation of the Westminster Assembly, postponing the discussion of the
theological content of the Westminster Confession until the present chapter,
for that confession is one of the clearest and most important examples of the
spirit of Calvinist orthodoxy. The Westminster Confession is much more
detailed and extensive than the canons of Dort, for it deals with a great
variety of themes. Therefore, it cannot be summarized here, and we must be
content with pointing to some of the crucial sections that show the
agreement of Calvinist orthodoxy in England with its counterpart as seen in
the Synod of Dort.
    The first chapter deals with the authority of Scripture, the “Supreme
Judge” in all religious controversy. Since not all the Bible is equally clear,
“the infallible rule of interpretation of Scripture is the Scripture itself.” (1.9)
This means that any obscure texts must be interpreted in the light of clearer
ones. After discussing the doctrine of the Trinity in traditional terms, the
Confession moves on to the topic of God’s Eternal Decree, about which it
affirms that from all eternity God did “freely and unchangeably ordain
whatsoever comes to pass.” (3.1) Part of this decree is that some people and
angels have been predestined to eternal life, and others to eternal death.
Furthermore, this is in no way based on God’s foreknowledge of the future
actions or responses of individuals.
    The Westminster Confession became one of the foremost documents of orthodox Calvinism,
                          particularly in English-speaking countries.

    The Westminster Confession also agrees with Dort that the result of
Adam’s sin is “this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed,
disabled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil.”
(6.4) And it also affirms limited atonement in declaring that Christ saves all
those whose redemption he also acquired. After sin, human beings have lost
all freedom to incline to salvation, which can only result from the “effectual
calling” with which God works in the wills of the elect, “determining them
to that which is good.” (10.1) These elect are justified when the Holy Spirit,
at the proper time, applies to them the work of Christ. Then follows
sanctification which, although imperfect in this life, is inevitable. Such
people “can neither totally nor finally fall away from the state of grace; but
shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be eternally saved.” (17.1)
    This is then followed by a long series of chapters on the matters being
discussed in England at the time of the Puritan Revolution, such as the
manner in which the Lord’s Day is to be observed, whether or not it is
lawful to swear an oath, the organization of the church, and so forth. But it
is clear that the theology of the Westminster Confession is very similar to
that of Dort, both in content and in its careful attention to strict orthodoxy.
Thus, the study of the canons of Dort and of the Westminster Confession
shows the nature of Calvinist orthodoxy in the seventeenth century—and
even into the eighteenth. While claiming to be a faithful interpreter of
Calvin, it tended to turn the theology of the Genevan Reformer into a strict
system that Calvin himself might have had difficulty recognizing. Calvin
had discovered in his own life the liberating joy of justification by the
unmerited grace of God. For him, the doctrine of predestination was a
means of expressing that joy and the unmerited nature of salvation. But in
the hands of his followers it became a test of orthodoxy and even of divine
favor. At times, they even seemed to confuse doubt regarding the doctrine
of predestination with actual reprobation and consequent damnation. There
was little left here of the humanist spirit of Calvin, a man who loved
literature as an art and who wrote with the elegance and care of a humanist.
                                     22

                  The Rationalist Option


   The reasoning, simple and easy to understand, that geometricians use
   to reach their most difficult demonstrations had made me think that
   all that can be encompassed by human knowledge is linked in the
   same fashion.
                                                           RENÉ DESCARTES



Rationalism,    an attitude that reached its apex in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, was characterized by its interest in the world and by its
confidence in the powers of reason. In Western Europe, there had been a
growing interest in the world of nature since the thirteenth century. That
was the time of Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas, who reintroduced
Aristotelian philosophy as a fundamental tool for theology. One of the
points of contrast between Aristotelianism and the Platonism that until then
had dominated theological thought was precisely that the new philosophy
emphasized the importance of sense perception. This meant that the
observation of the world could lead to true and significant knowledge, and
therefore from the time of Albert the Great—who wrote not only about God
and philosophy but also about animals—there had been a growing interest
in the world of nature. The later Middle Ages, with its distrust of
speculation, continued the same tendency. In a way, the art of the
Renaissance, with its appreciation for the beauty of the human body and of
the world, was a further expression of this interest. By the seventeenth
century, many thought that the goal of reason was the understanding of the
world of nature.
   But, parallel to that interest in the world, there appeared—mostly at the
time of the Renaissance—a growing confidence in the powers of reason.
Often, these two elements were combined in an effort to show the degree to
which the order of nature coincides with the order of reason. This may be
seen, for instance, in the work of Galileo, who was convinced that the entire
natural world was a system of mathematical relations, and that the ideal of
knowledge was the reduction of all phenomena to their quantitative
expression. Every success of such efforts seemed to confirm the most
optimistic expectations of the power of reason.

            DESCARTES AND CARTESIAN RATIONALISM
These various tendencies led to the philosophy of René Descartes, whose
lifetime approximately coincided with the first half of the seventeenth
century (1596–1650). His philosophical system was based on a great
confidence in mathematical reasoning, joined to a profound distrust of all
that is not absolutely certain. He would, therefore, compare his
philosophical method to geometry, a discipline that accepts only what is an
undeniable axiom or has been rationally proven.
    In applying that method, Descartes felt that he ought to begin with an
attitude of universal doubt, thus making sure that, once he found something
that could not be doubted, he could be absolutely certain of its truth. He
then found that undeniable first truth in his own existence. He could doubt
everything, but not that the doubting subject existed. I think, therefore I am
—in Latin, cogito, ergo sum—became the starting point for his philosophy.
This I whose existence cannot be doubted, however, is only the philosopher
as a thinking thing—res cogitans—for the existence of his body—the res
extensa—has not been proven and must still be doubted.
    Before proving his own existence as a body, however, Descartes felt that
he could prove the existence of God. He found in his mind the idea of a
“more perfect being,” and since his mind could not produce such an idea,
which was above itself, it must have been placed there by God. Therefore,
Descartes’s second conclusion was that God exists. It was only then, on the
basis of the existence of God, and of trust in the divine perfection, that
Descartes felt free to move on to prove the existence of the world and of his
own body.
    Descartes was a profoundly religious man who hoped that his
philosophy would be found useful by theologians. But not all agreed with
him on this matter. Since it was the time of strict orthodoxies, many
theologians feared the challenge of Cartesianism—as his philosophy was
called, for his Latin name was Cartesius. The universal doubt that Descartes
proposed as his starting point seemed to some no better than crass
skepticism. The theological faculties of several universities declared that
Aristotelianism was the philosophical system best suited to Christian
theology, and there were even those who declared that Cartesianism would
necessarily lead to heresy. Dismayed by such criticism, Descartes decided
to leave his native France and accepted the invitation of the queen of
Sweden to reside in that northern land, where he lived the rest of his days.
    But there were others who were enthused by Cartesianism and saw in it
the promise of a theological renewal. In France, those intellectual circles in
which Jansenism was in vogue embraced Cartesianism as its philosophical
counterpart. Eventually, others among the more orthodox also took up his
philosophical system, and the debate regarding the value of Cartesianism
continued for a long time.
    The main point at which Cartesianism led to further theological and
philosophical developments was the question of the relationship between
spirit and matter. Descartes had affirmed that humans consist of two parts:
one that thinks—res cogitans—and one that occupies space—res extensa—
or, in more traditional terms, soul and body. This was perfectly acceptable
to the orthodoxy of the time. The problem, however, was that Descartes had
been unable to offer a satisfactory explanation of the manner in which these
two relate. When the mind thinks, how are its decisions communicated to
the body? When something affects the body, how is this communicated to
the soul? Three main solutions were offered to this difficulty:
occasionalism, monism, and preestablished harmony. Occasionalism was
defended by the Flemish philosopher Arnold Geulincx and by the French
priest Nicolas Malebranche. They held that the body and soul do not
communicate directly, but only by divine intervention. It is God who moves
the body on occasion of the soul’s decision, and the soul on occasion of the
body’s feelings and requirements. Although the occasionalists argued that
this view magnified God’s greatness, their position was not generally
accepted, for it seemed to blame God for all events and thoughts.
    Monism—from the Greek monos, or one—was held by the Dutch Jew
Benedictus (or Baruch) de Spinoza. He sought to offer an explanation of
reality following a methodology similar to that of mathematics, as
Descartes had suggested. He solved the problem of the communication of
soul and body—and of the communication of any other substances—by
denying that there is more than one substance. Thought and physical
extension are not two different substances, but two attributes of a single
substance, as red and round are attributes of a single apple. The same may
be said about God and the world, for these are merely different attributes of
the one substance which is the universe. Needless to say, these doctrines
found little support among orthodox Christians, for whom belief in a God
who exists apart from the world is essential.
    Finally, the German philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz suggested “preestablished harmony.” In contrast to Spinoza,
Leibniz began with the existence of an infinite number of substances,
absolutely independent from each other, which he called monads. These
monads, as he said, “have no windows,” that is, cannot communicate with
each other. Nor does God make them communicate. Rather, from the very
beginning, God has created these monads so that they may act in seeming
interdependence. The manner in which soul and body communicate is very
similar to that in which various clocks in a shop “communicate” among
themselves: they do not. Rather, they all work according to the
preestablished order set by the clockmaker. If the clockmaker was a good
one, it will seem as if all the clocks communicate with one another in order
to keep the same time. This solution also met a great deal of opposition for
—although such was not Leibniz’s intent—it seemed to imply that God had
foreordained all things, both good and evil, and that there was no such thing
as human freedom.

                            EMPIRICISM
While these philosophical developments were taking place on the
Continent, in Great Britain philosophy was following a different route:
empiricism—from a Greek word meaning experience. Its leading figure was
Oxford professor John Locke, who in 1690 published his Essay on Human
Understanding. He had read the works of Descartes, and agreed that the
order of the world corresponded to the order of the mind. But he did not
believe that there were innate ideas, which one could discover by looking
into oneself. On the contrary, he held that all knowledge is derived from
experience—both the “outer experience” of the senses, and the “inner
experience” by which we know ourselves and the functioning of our minds.
This means that the only true knowledge is that which is based on our three
levels of experience: our own selves, whose existence we continually
experience; those outer realities that are presently before us; and God,
whose existence is proven at each moment by the existence of the self and
its experiences. Apart from these three, there is no certain knowledge.
    But there is another level of knowledge, that of probability, which plays
an important role in human life. At this level, we do not apply the strict
proofs of reason, but rather those of judgment. Judgment allows us to
surmise that, since we have repeatedly experienced John’s existence, it is
probable that he continues to exist even when he is not before us. Judgment,
although not absolutely certain, is necessary, for it is on its basis that we
conduct most of our affairs in life.
    Faith is assent to knowledge that is derived from revelation rather than
from reason. Therefore, its knowledge, although highly probable, is never
certain. Reason and judgment must be used in order to measure the degree
of probability of what we are asked to believe by faith. For this reason,
Locke opposed the “fanatical enthusiasm” of those who think that all they
say is based on divine revelation. For the same reason, he defended
religious toleration. Intolerance is born out of the muddled thinking that
confuses the probable judgments of faith with the certainty of empirical
reason. Besides, toleration is based on the very nature of society. The state
does not have the authority to limit the freedom of its citizens in matters
such as their personal religion.
    In 1695, Locke published a treatise, The Reasonableness of Christianity,
in which he claimed that Christianity is the most reasonable of religions.
According to him, the core of Christianity is the existence of God and faith
in Christ as the Messiah. But Locke did not believe that Christianity had
added anything of importance to what could in any case have been known
by the proper use of reason and judgment. In the final analysis, Christianity
was little more than a very clear expression of truths and laws that others
could have known by their natural faculties.

                                     DEISM
Locke’s opinions regarding religion reflected a way of thinking that was
becoming widespread even before the publication of his works. Tired of the
endless squabbles among the partisans of the many sects and movements
that appeared in England in the seventeenth century, many sought an
understanding of religion that went beyond narrow and quibbling
orthodoxy. A common alternative was that of the Deists, or freethinkers—
called Deists because they rejected what they considered the aberrations of
the atheists, and freethinkers in contrast to those who held to the narrow
limits of orthodoxy.
    The first great figure of Deism was Lord Herbert of Cherbury, who held
that true religion must be universal, not only in the sense of calling for the
allegiance of all, but also in the sense of being a religion that is natural to all
humankind. Such religion is not based on particular revelations, nor on
historical events, but rather on the natural instincts of every human being.
Its basic doctrines are five: the existence of God, the obligation to worship
God, the ethical requirements of such worship, the need for repentance, and
reward and punishment, in both this life and the one to follow. Although
there may possibly be divine revelation, any doctrine claiming to stem from
it must not contradict these five basic points; and in any case, since such a
revelation is given only to part of humanity, there is no reason to expect all
to accept it.
    Shortly after the publication of Locke’s Essay, John Toland published
what would become one of the classics of Deism: Christianity not
Mysterious, or a Treatise Showing that There is Nothing in the Gospel
Contrary to Reason, nor Above It, and that No Christian Doctrine Can Be
Properly Called a Mystery; and, in 1730, Matthew Tindal published
Christianity as Old as the World, or the Gospel a Republication of the
Religion of Nature. The very titles of these works suffice to show the nature
of Deism, and its effort to show that whatever there is of value in
Christianity coincides with “natural religion.”
    Deism fought on two fronts. On the one hand, it opposed the narrow
dogmatism that had taken hold of most branches of Christianity. On the
other, it tried to refute the easy skepticism of those who, tired of the
quibbling of theologians, simply abandoned all religion. But many
Christians, while not narrowly dogmatic, were uneasy with the manner in
which Deism tended to discount the significance of particular historical
events and revelation, for this discounted the significance of Jesus Christ.
Eventually, however, the most devastating criticism of Deism came not
from theologians, but from a Scottish philosopher who showed that
“reason” was not as “reasonable” as Deists and other rationalists believed.
His name was David Hume.

        DAVID HUME AND HIS CRITIQUE OF EMPIRICISM
David Hume (1711–1776) was a man of boundless optimism who was
nevertheless very pessimistic when it came to the powers of reason. His
own optimism made it possible for him to be skeptical about much that the
philosophers said, for he would not crumble even if the entire edifice of
philosophy were to come tumbling down. On the contrary, he felt free to
allow his intellectual curiosity to lead him wherever it would. Thus, taking
as his starting point Locke’s empiricism, he came to the conclusion that the
scope of true knowledge was much more limited than the rationalists
claimed. Indeed, a goodly part of what those philosophers thought they
could affirm on the basis of observation and reason had no such basis, but
was simply the result of irrational mental habits. And among such things
that the mind takes for granted are such fundamental notions as those of
substance and of cause and effect.
   David Hume was the man whom Kant credited with having wakened him from his “dogmatic
                                       slumber.”

    The empiricists claimed that only that knowledge which is based on
experience is true. But Hume pointed out that no one has ever seen or
experienced what we call cause and effect. We have indeed seen, for
instance, that a billiard ball arrives at the place where another one is lying.
Then we hear a noise and we see the first ball stop and the second one
move. If we repeat this experiment several times, we get similar results.
And then we say that the movement of the first ball caused the movement
of the other one. But the truth is that we have not seen any such thing. All
that we have seen is a series of phenomena, and our mind has linked them
by means of the notion of cause and effect. This last step, taken by any who
see a series of phenomena that are seemingly related, has no basis in
empirical observation. It is rather the result of our mental habits. Therefore,
according to the empiricists’ definition, it is not rational knowledge.
    The same can be said of the idea of substance. We say, for instance, that
we see an apple. But in truth what our senses perceive is a series of
attributes: form, color, weight, flavor, smell, and so forth. We also perceive
that those attributes coincide in one place, and that they seem to cling
together, as if something unites them. And then our mind, by one of those
habits that are not truly rational, declares that all these attributes reside in a
substance that we call apple. But, once again, we have not experienced the
substance itself. Pure empirical reason does not allow us to affirm that there
are such things as substances in which reside the various attributes that we
perceive.
    This critique of empiricist rationalism raised serious questions about
Deism. If the relation of cause and effect is not truly rational, the proof that
the Deists use for the existence of God, namely, that someone must have
caused this world, is no longer valid. Likewise, notions such as the “soul”
and “God” have little meaning if we cannot rationally speak of anything but
attributes, and never of substances beyond these attributes. Even so, many
felt that Hume’s argument was flawed. One of these was James Reid (1710–
1796), a Scotsman who in 1764 published An Inquiry into the Human Mind
on the Principles of Common Sense. In this book, Reid argued for the value
of self-evident knowledge or common sense, and for this reason his position
came to be known as common sense philosophy. Thus, in spite of Hume’s
critique, Deist views such as those proposed by John Tolland more than half
a century earlier did not disappear.

                     NEW CURRENTS IN FRANCE
Meanwhile, new currents of thought were developing in France and other
areas of the Continent. The great figure of this new philosophy was
François-Marie Arouet, better known under his pen name, “Voltaire.” His
political views led to a period of imprisonment in the Bastille, an exile in
London, and several years of expatriation in Switzerland. But the more
French authorities tried to suppress his teachings, the more Voltaire was
admired by his fellow citizens. He was an enemy of all fanaticism.
Witnessing the persecution of French Protestants during the last years of
Louis XIV’s reign, he was convinced that such persecution was wrong and
would forever be seen as a stain on the name of the Sun King. When he
read Locke’s writings on political and religious tolerance, he took up that
cause, and devoted his wit and his literary ability to it. But he was not
convinced by the optimistic rationalism then in vogue. He commented that
Cartesianism was like a good novel, in which all is credible and nothing is
true. He also mocked the English Deists for claiming to know about God
and the soul more than it is given to human reason to know.
    Thus, Voltaire and his followers were rationalists in their own way. His
satirical wit—which he also applied to himself—scoffed at all the great
systems that were then fashionable. But he did believe in the use of reason
as common sense, whose dictates life must follow. Furthermore, he argued
that the history of humankind was no more than the history of a progressive
understanding of ourselves and our institutions, and our efforts to adjust to
that ever-clearer understanding. In particular, this meant progress in the
understanding and safeguarding of human rights. Monarchy, although a
necessary part of government, was not intended for the benefit of the
sovereign, but rather for that of the subjects, whose rights all must respect
and defend. By stating and divulging such ideas, Voltaire was one of the
forerunners of the French Revolution.
    One of Voltaire’s contemporaries, Charles Louis de Secondat, Baron de
Montesquieu, sought to apply the principles of reason to the theory of
government. He thus came to the conclusion that a republic is a better form
of government than either despotism, which is based on terror, or monarchy,
whose foundation is a prejudice called honor. Since power corrupts,
Montesquieu suggested that government should be exercised by three
powers that would balance and limit each other: the legislative, the
executive, and the judicial. Thus, by 1748, several decades before the
American and French Revolutions, Montesquieu was proposing some of the
basic doctrines of those movements.
    At about the same time, Jean Jacques Rousseau was expounding on
other theories that were no less revolutionary. According to him, what we
call progress is not really such, for what in truth has happened is that
humankind has progressively departed from its natural state and fallen into
artificiality. In the field of politics, this means that we must return to the
original order, whose purpose was to serve the governed by safeguarding
justice and freedom. Rulers are in truth employees of the people, and their
task is to defend freedom and justice. In the field of religion, Rousseau held
that dogmas and institutions are part of the corruption that has characterized
the so-called human progress, and that it is necessary to return to natural
religion, consisting of belief in God, the immortality of the soul, and the
moral order.
    Therefore, in various ways, and without agreeing on all matters, these
various philosophers gave French rationalism a particular flavor, shunning
the speculative flights of other rationalists, and concentrating rather on the
social and political implications of reason understood as common sense. By
so doing, they were preparing the way for the French Revolution.

                             IMMANUEL KANT
The philosophical movements of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries
led to the shattering critique of Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), one of the
greatest philosophers of all time. He had been a firm believer in rationalism
until, as he later declared, he was awakened from his “dogmatic slumber”
by reading Hume. Cartesianism had not been able to overcome the
difficulties posed by the problem of the communication of substances.
Eventually, the Cartesian theory of innate ideas had led to Leibniz, for
whom all ideas were innate, and there was no communication between the
mind and other realities. Empiricism, on the other hand, had led to Hume’s
critique that, if only that knowledge is valid which is acquired through
experience, there is no valid knowledge of such fundamental matters as the
notion of cause and effect or the idea of substance.
    In his Critique of Pure Reason, published in 1781, Kant proposed a
radical alternative to both systems. According to him, there is no such thing
as innate ideas; but there are fundamental structures of the mind, and within
those structures we must place whatever data the senses provide us. Those
structures are, first of all, time and space; and then twelve “categories,”
such as causality, existence, substance, and so forth. Time, space, and the
twelve categories are not something that we perceive through the senses,
rather, they are the structures that our mind has to use in order to organize
the sensations that are fed to it by the senses. To make something thinkable,
we must place it within the molds of our mental structures. The senses
provide a chaotic multitude of sensations. It is only after the mind orders
them within the structures of time, space, and the categories that they
become intelligible experiences.
    Consequently, the simplistic rationalism of previous generations is no
longer possible. In knowledge, what we have is not things as they are in
themselves, but rather things as our mind is able to grasp them. Therefore,
there is no such thing as purely objective knowledge, and the pure
rationality of Cartesians, Empiricists, and Deists is no more than an illusion.
    Kant’s work also meant that many of the arguments traditionally used in
support of Christian doctrine were no longer valid. For instance, since
existence is not a datum derived from reality, but rather one of the
categories of the mind, there is no way to prove the existence of God or of
the soul. Nor can we speak of an “eternity” consisting in the absence of
time, since our mind cannot really conceive such a thing. On the other hand,
this does not mean an absolute denial of God, the soul, or eternity. What it
means is that, if such things are true, reason cannot know them, just as the
eye cannot hear and the ear cannot see.
    What, then, is one to say about religion? Kant dealt with this subject in
several of his works—particularly in his Critique of Practical Reason,
published in 1788, where he argues that, although pure reason cannot prove
the existence of God and the soul, there is “practical reason” that has to do
with the moral life, and whose procedure is different from that of pure
reason. This practical reason, whose fundamental principle is to “act in such
a manner that the rule for your action can be made a universal rule,” does
know the existence of God as the judge of all action, of the soul and its
freedom as the occasion for moral action, and of life after death as the
means for rewarding good and punishing evil. All this is very similar to
what the Deists had said, and therefore in discussing religious matters Kant
did not go much beyond them.
    Kant’s significance to religion and theology, however, goes far beyond
his rather uninspired attempts to ground religion in morality. His
philosophical work dealt a deathblow to the easy rationalism of his
predecessors, and to the notion that it is possible to speak in purely rational
and objective terms of matters such as the existence of God and the future
life. After him, as we shall see later, theologians dealing with the
relationship between faith and reason had to take his work into account.
Eventually others would carry his views much further, questioning the
universality and immutability of the categories of the mind, and arguing that
factors such as psychology, culture, and language help shape those
categories. Thus, Kant’s work, which in some ways was the high point of
modern philosophy, in others set the stage for the post-modern critique of
the modern insistence on objectivity and universality as signs of true
knowledge.
                                    23

                 The Spiritualist Option


   I was glad that I was commanded to turn people to that inward light,
   spirit, and grace, by which all might know their salvation, and their
   way to God; even that divine Spirit which would lead them into all
   Truth and which I infallibly knew would never deceive any.


GEORGE FOX

The    seemingly endless debates on dogma, and the intolerance of
Christians among themselves, led many to seek refuge in a purely spiritual
religion. Also, excessive emphasis on correct doctrine worked in favor of
the higher classes, who had greater opportunities for education. Those who
did not have such opportunities, and who therefore could not discuss
complicated matters of theology, were seen as children, needing someone to
guide them through the intricacies of dogma in order not to fall into error.
Therefore, the spiritualist movement of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries attracted both cultured people who had little use for narrow-
minded dogmatism, and others of little or no formal education who found in
the movement an opportunity for expressing themselves. While some of the
founders of spiritualist groups or schools were relatively unschooled, they
soon counted among their ranks others of greater education and higher
social standing.
    Due to the nature of the spiritualist movement, its history is difficult to
trace. The movement produced a multitude of currents and leaders whose
followers and doctrines are so entwined that it is not always possible to
distinguish among them, or to determine the originator of any particular
idea. Therefore, the simplest way to grasp the nature of the movement is to
turn our attention to three of its main leaders, who differ dramatically from
one another: Boehme, Fox, and Swedenborg.

                             JAKOB BOEHME
Jakob Boehme (1575–1624) was born in Silesia, Germany. His parents
were staunch Lutherans of humble means. In the midst of that pious family,
young Jakob developed a deep faith; but the sermons of that time, long
dissertations on theological debates, caused him to lose interest. He was
fourteen years old when his father apprenticed him to a cobbler, which
became his lifelong occupation. But, shortly after beginning his
apprenticeship, he began having visions, and eventually his master threw
him out, declaring that he wanted an apprentice, not a prophet.
    Boehme then became a wandering cobbler, traveling from place to place
mending shoes. In those travels he came to the conclusion that the
leadership of the church had built a veritable Tower of Babel with its
interminable quibbling debates. He therefore determined to cultivate his
inner life, and to read all he could find on that subject. Thus he reached a
series of conclusions on the nature of the world and human life, which were
confirmed in visions and other spiritual experiences. But for some time he
kept these convictions and experiences to himself, and was content with his
life as a cobbler. When he was about twenty-five years old, he put an end to
his wanderings and set up shop in the town of Goerlitz, where he was able
to make a fairly comfortable living.
    Although he did not feel called to preach, Boehme was convinced that
God had ordered him to record his visions. The result was the book
Brilliant Dawn, in which the seer repeatedly asserts that he is writing what
God has dictated word for word, and that he is no more than a pen in the
hands of God. Boehme did not publish his book, but a manuscript copy
reached the local pastor, who accused him before the magistrates. Under
threat of deportation, Boehme promised to teach or write no more on
religious matters, and for five years kept his promise. But in 1618,
compelled by new visions and by the encouragement of some of his
admirers, he began writing anew. One of his followers, without his
permission, published three of his works, and these also reached the pastor,
who once again accused him of heresy. As a result, Boehme was forced to
leave Goerlitz.
    He then went to the court of the Elector of Saxony, where several
theologians examined his teachings without reaching a conclusion, for they
confessed themselves unable to understand exactly what he meant. Their
recommendation was that Boehme be given more time to clarify his ideas.
But he would not be granted that time, for he fell ill and decided to return to
Goerlitz in order to die there among his friends and followers. He was fifty
years old when he died.
    The theologians’ response—that they could not understand what he
meant—was not simply a subterfuge to avoid pronouncing judgment. The
truth is that Boehme’s writings continue to be subject to various
interpretations. In his writings, one finds an odd mixture of traditionally
Christian themes with others taken from magic, alchemy, occultism, and
theosophy. How all this relates is never clear, and the ambiguities are made
greater by his use of daring metaphors that are never explained. What does
he mean, for instance, by “the eternal womb,” or by “the mother of all
births”? Are these simply other names for God, or are they intended to
convey something else?
    In any case, in this context what is important is not the exact content of
Boehme’s teachings, but their basic direction. And this is very clear. It is a
reaction against the cold dogmatism of theologians, and against the
seemingly empty liturgy of the church. Against these, Boehme exalted the
freedom of the spirit, the inner life, and direct and individual revelation. He
declared, for instance, that since “the letter kills,” believers ought not to
guided by Scripture, but by the Holy Spirit, who inspired the biblical
writers and even now inspires believers. As he said, “I have enough with
the book that I am. If I have within me the Spirit of Christ, the entire Bible
is in me. Why would I wish for more books? Why discuss what is outside,
while not having learned what is within me?”8
    Boehme did not have many followers during his lifetime, but his books
later gained him many admirers. In England, some of these joined to form a
Boehmenist movement, some followers of which clashed with the Quakers
of George Fox. Thus, the spiritualist movement, born in part as a protest
against the doctrinal debates of traditional theology, was eventually
embroiled in similar controversies.

                   GEORGE FOX AND THE QUAKERS
George Fox (1624–1691) was born in a small English village in the year of
Boehme’s death. He too was of humble origin, and he too was a cobbler’s
apprentice. But at nineteen years of age, disgusted at the licentiousness of
his fellow apprentices and feeling compelled by the Spirit of God, he quit
his occupation and began a life of wandering and attending religious
meetings of all sorts, seeking illumination from on high. He also devoted
himself to the study of Scripture, and it was said that he knew it by heart.
Fox experienced many inner conflicts, at times despairing of finding truth,
and at other times encouraged by religious experiences. Slowly, he came to
the conviction that all the various sects that abounded in England were
wrong, and their worship was an abomination before God.
    Fox challenged much of traditional Christianity. If God does not dwell in
houses made by human hands, how dare anyone call those buildings where
they gather “churches”? They are in truth no more than houses with
belfries. Pastors who work for a salary are not real shepherds, but “priests”
and “journeymen.” Hymns, orders of worship, sermons, sacraments, creeds,
ministers—they are all human hindrances to the freedom of the Spirit. Over
against all these things, Fox placed the “inner light.” This is a seed that
exists in all human beings, and is the true way we must follow in order to
find God. The Calvinist doctrine of the total depravity of humanity is a
denial of the love of God and of the experience of those who love God. On
the contrary, there is an inner light in everyone, no matter how dim it may
be. Thanks to that light, pagans can be saved as well as Christians. This
light, however, must not be confused with the intellect or with conscience.
It is not the “natural reason” of the Deists, nor a series of moral principles
that point to God. It is rather the capability we all have to recognize and
accept the presence of God. It is by it that we are able to believe and
understand Scripture. Therefore, communication with God through the
inner light is previous to any communication by external means.
    Although those who were close to him knew something of the fire
burning within Fox, for several years he abstained from proclaiming what
he was convinced he had discovered regarding the true meaning of faith and
Christianity. At that time there were in England many religious sects, and
Fox attended all without finding contentment in any. Finally, he felt called
by the Spirit to speak out at a Baptist meeting, announcing the inner truths
in which he now believed. From that point on, such urgings of the Spirit
became more frequent. In gatherings of various religious groups, Fox would
declare that he had been ordered by the Spirit to announce his spiritual
vision of Christianity. His words were often received with contempt and
hostility, and he was repeatedly thrown out of meetings, beaten, and stoned.
But such incidents would not stop him, and soon thereafter he was in
another “house with a belfry,” interrupting the service and proclaiming his
message. His followers grew rapidly in number. At first they called
themselves children of light; but Fox preferred the name of friends, which
would later become their official name. But those who saw that their
religious enthusiasm was such that they would tremble began calling them
Quakers, and that was the name by which they became known.
    Beginning in 1652, he had the firm support of Margaret Fell, a
gentlewoman who would be widowed in 1658, and would marry him in
1669. By that time she had become known as a leader in the nascent
movement, who would make use of her influence as a member of the gentry
in order to defend it. But political opposition to Quakerism was such that in
1664 she was arrested for supporting the movement, suffered the
confiscation of all her property, and was sentenced to life imprisonment. It
was after being released by order of the king that she married Fox. The rest
of their lives was spent in teaching and missionary activities, repeatedly
interrupted by new orders of imprisonment. George Fox died in 1691, and
Margaret Fell Fox in 1702.
    Since Fox and his followers believed that any structure in worship could
be an obstacle to the work of the Spirit, the Friends’ worship service took
place in silence. Any who felt called to speak or pray aloud were free to do
so. When the Spirit moved them, women had the same right to speak as
men. Fox himself did not prepare to speak at such meetings, but simply
allowed the Spirit to move him. There were times when many had gathered
hoping to hear him speak, but he refused to do so because he did not feel
moved by the Spirit. Also, the Quakers did not include in their services the
traditional sacraments of baptism and communion, for they feared that
physical water, bread, and wine would draw attention away from the
spiritual. This was the main reason for their conflict with the Boehmenists,
who continued celebrating the sacraments—although calling them
ordinances.
    Fox was aware of the danger that his emphasis on the freedom of the
Spirit would lead to excessive individualism. Other movements with a
similar emphasis have not lasted long, for the exercise of individual
freedom has led to the dissolution of the group. Fox avoided this danger by
underscoring the importance of community and love. In the Friends’
meetings, decisions were not made by majority vote. If a unanimous
agreement was not reached, the decision was postponed, and the meeting
continued in silence until the Spirit offered a solution. If one was not
received, the matter was left pending for another occasion.
    There were many who disliked the teachings and practices of Fox and
the Quakers. Religious leaders resented the manner in which these
“fanatics” interrupted their services in order to preach or to read Scripture.
The powerful felt the need to teach a lesson to these Friends, who refused to
pay tithes, to swear an oath, to bow before their “betters,” or to uncover
their head before any but God. The Quakers argued that, since God was
addressed in the familiar “Thou,” no other being ought to be addressed in
the more respectful “You.” To many who were used to the submission of
their “inferiors,” all this seemed disrespectful and an intolerable
insubordination.
    As a result, Fox was repeatedly beaten, and he spent years in prison—as
did Margaret Fell Fox. He was sent to prison for the first time for having
interrupted a preacher who declared that the ultimate truth was to be found
in Scripture, and arguing that this was not true, for ultimate truth was in the
Spirit who had inspired Scripture. On other occasions he was accused of
blasphemy, or of conspiring against the government. When the authorities
offered to pardon him, he refused, declaring that he was not guilty, and that
to accept a pardon for something he had not done was to lie. On another
occasion, when he was serving six months for blasphemy, he was offered
his freedom in exchange for service in the republican army. He refused,
declaring that Christians ought not to use any weapons other than those of
the Spirit, and had his sentence prolonged by an additional six months.
From that point on, the Friends have been known for their staunch,
unshakable convictions.
    When he was not in prison, Fox spent most of his time in Swarthmoor
Hall—Margaret’s home—and this became the headquarters of the Friends.
The rest of the time he traveled throughout England and abroad, visiting
Quaker meetings and taking his message to new areas. First he went to
Scotland, where he was accused of sedition; then to Ireland; later he spent
two years in the Caribbean and North America; and he also made two visits
to the Continent. In all these lands he gained converts, and by the time of
his death, in 1691, his followers were counted by the tens of thousands.
    They too were persecuted. They were thrown in jail for vagrancy,
blasphemy, inciting to riot, and refusing to pay tithes. In 1664, Charles II
issued an edict forbidding unlicensed religious assemblies. Many groups
continued gathering in secret. But the Quakers declared that it would be a
lie to do so, and therefore simply disobeyed the royal edict. Thousands were
then imprisoned, and by the time religious tolerance was granted in 1689,
hundreds had died in prison.
    The most famous of Fox’s followers was William Penn, after whom the
state of Pennsylvania is named. His father was a British admiral who tried
to secure for him the best education available. While he was a student,
young William became a Puritan. Then, while studying in France, he came
under the influence of the Huguenots. In 1667, back in England, he became
a Quaker. His father, not knowing what to do with so “fanatical” a son,
threw him out of the house. Penn continued firm in his convictions, and
eventually had to spend seven months in the Tower of London. It is said
that at that time he sent word to the king, that the Tower was the worst of
arguments to convince him, so, no matter who is right, whoever uses force
to seek religious assent is necessarily wrong. Finally, thanks to the
intervention of his father and other well-placed friends, he was set free. He
then spent several years raising a family, traveling throughout Europe, and
writing in defense of the Friends.
    His arguments in defense of religious tolerance, however, were not well
received. Some even said that he was secretly a Jesuit, and that his true goal
was to restore to Roman Catholics the privileges they had lost. It was then
that Penn conceived the idea of what he called his “holy experiment.” Some
friends had spoken to him about New Jersey, in North America. Since the
crown owed him a significant amount of money, and was not willing to pay
him in cash, Penn was able to obtain from Charles II a grant of land in what
is now Pennsylvania. His purpose was to found a new colony in which there
would be complete religious freedom. By then other British colonies had
been founded in North America. But, with the exception of Rhode Island,
all were marked by religious intolerance. In Massachusetts, the most
intolerant of the colonies, Quakers were persecuted, condemned to exile,
and even mutilated and executed. What Penn now proposed was a new
colony in which all would be free to worship according to their own
convictions. This seemed bad enough to an intolerant age. But even worse
was Penn’s plan to buy from the Indians the land that the crown had granted
him. He was convinced that the Indians, and not the crown, were the
legitimate owners of the land. And he hoped to establish such cordial
relations with them that the settlers would have no need to defend
themselves by force of arms. The capital of this holy experiment would be
called Philadelphia—the city of fraternal love.
    No matter how ill-conceived Penn’s experiment might have seemed to
the more “solid” British citizens, soon there were many people, not only in
England, but also in other parts of Europe, willing to take part in it. Many
of them were Quakers, and therefore the Friends dominated the political life
of the colony for some time. But there were also settlers of many different
persuasions. Under the leadership of Penn, who was the first governor of
the colony, relations with the Indians were excellent, and for a long time his
dream of a peaceful settlement was a reality. Much later, in 1756, another
governor declared war on the Indians, and the Quakers resigned their
positions in government. But the religious tolerance that was part of Penn’s
“holy experiment” was eventually imbedded in the U.S. Constitution, as
well as in those of many other countries.

                       EMANUEL SWEDENBORG
George Fox was born in the year of Boehme’s death; and Emanuel
Swedenborg (1688–1772), was born three years before the death of Fox.
Therefore, the lives of the three leaders with whom we deal in this chapter
span almost the totality of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
   Some of Swedenborg’s teachings were very similar to those of Boehme
and Fox, but in other respects he was very different from them. While the
other two were of humble birth, Swedenborg was born in an aristocratic
Swedish family. Also in contrast to the two men, he received the best
education available, for he studied at the University of Uppsala, and then
spent five years traveling in England, the Netherlands, France, and
Germany, always in the quest for knowledge. While Fox and Boehme
showed signs of their religious restlessness from an early age, young
Swedenborg was interested in scientific studies, and it was through these
that he began the quest that led him to his religious convictions.
    After many years of scientific inquiry, Swedenborg had a vision he said
had carried him into the spiritual world, where he had been able to see
eternal truths. After that vision he wrote voluminously on the true meaning
of reality and of Scripture. According to him, all that exists is a reflection of
the attributes of God, and therefore the visible world “corresponds” with the
invisible one. The same is true of Scripture, which reflects truths that can
only be known by those who have entered the spiritual world.
    Swedenborg was convinced that his writings would form the beginning
of a new era in the history of the world and of religion. He even claimed
that what had taken place when he received his revelations was what the
Bible meant when speaking of the second coming of Christ. As was to be
expected, such ideas were not well received by the majority of his
contemporaries, and therefore the circle of his followers was very small. He
himself did not feel called to found a new church, but rather to call the
existing one to a new understanding of its nature and message. But in 1784,
twelve years after his death, his disciples founded the Church of the New
Jerusalem, whose members were never many but which has survived into
the twenty-first century. Also, early in the nineteenth century, the
Swedenborgian Society was founded with the purpose of publishing and
distributing his writings.
    Of the three religious leaders discussed in this chapter, only Fox was
able to lead and organize a vast movement. This was partly because he was
convinced that a community of believers was necessary for religious life.
Also, Fox and his Friends contrasted with most other spiritualists in their
interest in social problems and their active participation in seeking solutions
to social ills. But, apart from the case of the Quakers, the spiritualist
movement was destined to have little impact on the church and on society at
large, for its interest was individualistic and otherworldly. A far greater
impact would be made by another movement of protest against both
rationalism and cold dogmatism—a movement to which we shall now turn.
                                     24

                      The Pietist Option


   How many rich men are there among the Methodists (observe, there
   was not one, when they were first joined together) who actually do
   “deny themselves and take up their cross daily”? Who of you that are
   now rich, deny yourselves just as you did when you were poor?


JOHN WESLEY

Pietism    was a response to the dogmatism of the theologians and the
rationalism of the philosophers, both of which it contrasted with the living
faith that is at the heart of Christianity, and to the Thirty Years’ War, which
led many to see greater value in personal devotion and religious experience.
Although, in its strict sense, Pietism refers only to the German movement
led by Spener and Francke, in this chapter we shall deal also with the
similar movements led by Zinzendorf and Wesley.

            GERMAN PIETISM: SPENER AND FRANCKE
Although many of the elements of what was later called Pietism were
already circulating in Germany long before his time, Philip Jakob Spener
(1635–1705) has rightly been called the father of Pietism. He was born and
reared in Alsace, in an aristocratic family of deep Lutheran convictions. He
studied theology in the best Protestant universities and, after receiving his
doctorate, became a pastor in Frankfurt. Since pastors were supported by
the state, and considered government functionaries, there were many who
were content with preaching and performing the sacraments. But Spener
was convinced that his task went far beyond that, and included fostering the
personal faith of his parishioners. As a pastor in Frankfurt, he founded
groups of Bible study and devotion that he called “colleges of piety.” In
1675, five years after beginning this experiment, he published his Pia
desideria, in which he outlined a program for the development of piety.
This became the fundamental charter of Pietism.
    In this book, Spener turned to the Lutheran doctrine of the universal
priesthood of believers, and suggested that there be less emphasis on the
differences between laity and clergy, and more on the common
responsibility of all Christians. This in turn meant that there should be
among the laity a more intense life of devotion and study. To attain this
goal, Spener suggested small groups such as his “colleges of piety.” As to
pastors and theologians, he insisted that candidates should be examined to
ascertain that they were “true Christians” of deep personal faith. And he
also called on preachers to set aside their polemical and academic tone, for
the purpose of preaching is not to show the preacher’s knowledge, but
rather to call believers to be obedient to the Word of God. In all this there
was no attack on the doctrines of the church, for Spener was in total
agreement with them. But he insisted that doctrine is not to serve as a
substitute for personal faith. While it is true that theological error may have
disastrous consequences for the Christian life, it is also true that those who
do not go beyond dogma have scarcely penetrated the riches of Christianity.
Thus, what he proposed was a new reformation—or at least the completion
of what had begun in the sixteenth century and been interrupted by
doctrinal debates. Soon many saw in him a new Luther, and from various
parts of Germany he received letters thanking him for his inspiration and
asking his advice.
    All this, however, was not regarded favorably by the leaders of Lutheran
orthodoxy. Although Spener did not deviate from Lutheran doctrine, he
seemed to discount the fine points of doctrine that orthodoxy had clarified.
And he insisted—as had Luther before him—on the need to return
constantly to Scriptures and to read it with a spirit of devotion and piety.
Furthermore, there was one point at which he seemed to deviate from the
Lutheran tradition. Luther, concerned and overwhelmed as he was by the
doctrine of justification by faith, had paid scant attention to sanctification.
In the struggles of the time, he had insisted that what was important was not
the manner of life of the believer, but the grace of God—for it is grace, and
not personal sanctity, that justifies. Calvin and the Reformed tradition,
while agreeing with Luther on justification, insisted that the God who
justifies is also the One who sanctifies, and that God offers to believers the
power for holiness of life. On this point, Spener and his followers were
closer to Calvin than to Luther. Spener himself had been influenced by
Reformed teachers, and was convinced that Lutheranism should place
greater emphasis on the need for sanctification. For this reason, many
orthodox Lutheran theologians declared that he was in truth a Calvinist.
    Spener also made himself vulnerable by his apocalypticism. As has
happened so often in difficult times, he became convinced that the
prophecies of the book of Revelation were being fulfilled, and that the end
was near. Since his predictions did not come true, his enemies could argue
that, having erred on that point, he was probably mistaken on others as well.
    In a sense, what was at stake in the controversy over Pietism was
whether the Christian faith should simply serve to sanction common
morality, or should rather call believers to a different sort of life. Orthodox
preaching took for granted that God requires of believers nothing more than
correct doctrine and a decent life. The Pietists insisted on the contrast
between what society expects of its members and what God requires of the
faithful. This has always been an uncomfortable challenge for a comfortable
church.
    Spener’s greatest follower was August Hermann Francke, who was also
from a well-to-do Lutheran family. His teachings were similar to Spener’s
—although he did not agree with the latter’s interpretation of current events
as those described in Revelation. Even more than Spener, he insisted on the
joy of Christian life, which should be a song of praise to God. As a
professor at the University of Halle, he also paid more attention to the
relationship between Pietism and traditional Lutheran theology. He
described his own religious experience as follows:
   Suddenly, God heard me. As easily as one turns a hand, my doubts
   vanished. In my heart I was certain of the grace of God in Jesus
   Christ. Since then I was able to call God, not only “God,” but also
   “Father.” Sadness and anxiety immediately left my heart. And I was
   suddenly overcome by a wave of joy, such that I praised and
   magnified God aloud, who had granted me such grace.9

    This description of a religious experience, coupled with those of Wesley
and others, has led to the false assumption that Pietists insisted on the need
for such a personal experience. In fact, in its early stages the movement
advocated a living, personal faith, and the manner or time in which one
arrived at it was not of prime importance.
    Thousands of Christians embraced the Pietist movement, and joined in
small circles or “colleges of piety,” even though some theologians accused
the movement of being emotional, subjective, and even heretical.
Eventually, in spite of such opposition, Pietism left its mark on the entire
Lutheran tradition. And, although both Spener and Francke were Lutherans,
Pietism also gained adherents among the German Reformed. The
outstanding figure of Reformed Pietism was F.A. Lampe (1683–1729),
whose hymns, sermons, and books did much to spread the spirit of Pietism.
Lampe avoided the technical language typical of orthodoxy, and thus won a
wide following among the laity, and bitter opposition from academic
theologians. But Reformed orthodoxy in Germany did not have the political
leverage of Lutheran orthodoxy, and therefore Reformed Pietism did not
suffer the political pressures under which its Lutheran counterpart labored
—at least, not until it moved into the Netherlands, where Reformed
orthodoxy held sway. Later, in North America, the Great Awakening would
be an indication of the degree to which Pietism was making inroads into the
Reformed tradition.
    However, the most significant contribution of Pietism to the story of
Christianity was the birth of Protestant missions. The reformers of the
sixteenth century, involved as they were in a struggle for the survival of
Protestantism, paid little attention to the non-Christian world. Some even
declared that modern Christians were not called to preach to other nations,
since that was a commandment given exclusively to the apostles. At first,
the Pietists were not interested in world missions, although they were active
in meeting the needs of their fellow Christians by founding schools and
institutions to serve orphans, the poor, and others in need. But in 1707 the
king of Denmark, an admirer of the Pietists, decided to send missionaries to
his colonies in India. He could find no one in his own possessions to
undertake this task, and asked Francke at the University of Halle to send
him two of his most promising disciples. These two, Bartholomaeus
Ziegenbalg and Heinrich Plutschau, founded in India the mission of
Tranquebar. Their letters and reports, circulated in Germany, awakened
great interest among the Pietists. Soon, under Francke’s direction, the
University of Halle became a center for the training of missionaries. And in
Denmark, with the king’s support and under Pietist leadership, a school of
missions was founded for training missionaries to Lapland and Greenland.

                 ZINZENDORF AND THE MORAVIANS
Meanwhile, Pietism had also made an impact on the young Count Nikolaus
Ludwig von Zinzendorf, Spener’s godson. Zinzendorf had been profoundly
religious from childhood and would later declare that he had never felt
separated from God, and could speak of no experience of conversion. His
parents, devout Pietists, sent him to the University of Halle, where he
studied under Francke. Later he also went to Wittenberg, one of the main
centers of Lutheran orthodoxy, and repeatedly clashed with his teachers.
After traveling to other countries, and studying law, he was married and
entered the service of the court of Dresden.
    It was at Dresden that Zinzendorf first met a group of Moravians who
would change the course of his life. These were Hussites who had been
forced to leave their native Moravia to escape persecution, and Zinzendorf
offered them asylum in his lands. There they founded the community of
Herrnhut, which so attracted Zinzendorf’s interest that he resigned his post
at Dresden and joined it. Under his direction, the Moravians became part of
the local Lutheran parish. But there were tensions, for the Lutherans were
unwilling to trust these foreigners imbued with Pietism.
    In 1731, while in Denmark, Zinzendorf met a group of Eskimos who had
been converted by the Lutheran missionary Hans Egede, and this kindled in
him an interest in missions that would dominate the rest of his life. Soon the
community at Herrnhut was on fire with the same zeal, and in 1732 its first
missionaries left for the Caribbean. In a few years, there were also
Moravian missionaries in Africa, India, South America, and North America
—where they founded the communities of Bethlehem and Nazareth in
Pennsylvania, and Salem in North Carolina. Thus, within a period of twenty
years a movement that had begun with two hundred refugees had more
missionaries overseas than had been sent out by all Protestant churches
since the Protestant Reformation two centuries earlier.
   Meanwhile, conflicts with Lutheran authorities in Germany did not
abate. Zinzendorf himself was banned from Saxony, and traveled to North
America, where he was present at the founding of the Bethlehem
community in 1741. Shortly after Zinzendorf’s return, peace was made
between the Lutherans and the Moravians, who were acknowledged as true
Lutherans. But this was only temporary. Zinzendorf himself had agreed to
be made a bishop by the Moravians, who claimed to have the ancient
episcopal succession of the Hussites, and this caused further tensions with
the Lutherans. Zinzendorf died at Herrnhut in 1760, and shortly thereafter
his followers broke with Lutheranism. Although the Moravian church never
had a large membership and soon was unable to continue sending and
supporting so many missionaries, its example contributed to the great
missionary awakening of the nineteenth century. But perhaps the greatest
significance of the movement was its impact on John Wesley and, through
him, on the entire Methodist tradition.

                  JOHN WESLEY AND METHODISM
Late in 1735, and early in 1736, a second Moravian contingent was sailing
to the New World hoping to preach to the Indians of Georgia. On shipboard
was a young Anglican priest, John Wesley by name, whom Governor
Oglethorpe of Georgia had invited to serve as a pastor in Savannah. The
young man had accepted, hoping to be able to preach to the Indians, about
whose virtues he had unrealistic expectations. All went well during the
early days of the crossing, and young Wesley learned enough German to be
able to communicate with his Moravian companions. But then the weather
turned against them, and the ship was soon in dire straits. The mainmast
split, and panic would have overwhelmed the crew, had it not been for the
unbelievable calm of the Moravians, who sang throughout the ordeal.
Meanwhile, Wesley, who was also chaplain of the vessel, came to the bitter
realization that he was more concerned about himself than about his fellow
travelers. After the storm, the Moravians told him that they could behave so
bravely because they did not fear death; and the young man began to doubt
the depth of his own faith.
    After reaching Savannah, Wesley asked the Moravian Gottlieb
Spangenberg for advice regarding his work as a pastor and as a missionary
to the Indians. In his diary, he left a record of that conversation:

   He said, “My brother, I must first ask you one or two questions. Have
   you the witness within yourself? Does the Spirit of God bear witness
   with your spirit, that you are a child of God?” I was surprised, and
   knew not what to answer. He observed it, and asked, “Do you know
   Jesus Christ?” I paused, and said, “I know he is the Saviour of the
   world.” “True,” replied he; “but do you know he has saved you?” I
   answered, “I hope he has died to save me.” He only added, “Do you
   know yourself?” I said, “I do.”
        As a postscript to that conversation, the young Anglican pastor
   commented: “But I fear they were vain words.”10
John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, combined the religious zeal of the Moravians with the social
                    activism that had long characterized the Reformed tradition.

    These experiences left him moved and confused. Wesley had always
thought of himself as a good Christian. His father, Samuel Wesley, was an
Anglican priest, and his mother Susanna was the daughter of another. She
had been particularly careful in the religious and moral instruction of her
nineteen children. When John was five, fire broke out in the parsonage. The
young lad was miraculously saved, and thereafter his mother thought of him
as “a brand plucked from the burning” because God had plans for him. At
Oxford, he had distinguished himself both as a scholar and as a devout
young man. After helping his father in the parish for some time, he had
returned to Oxford, where he had joined a religious society founded by his
brother Charles and a group of friends. Its members had made a covenant to
lead a holy and sober life, to take communion at least once a week, to be
faithful in their private devotions, to visit the prisons regularly, and to spend
three hours together every afternoon, studying the Bible and books of
devotion. Since he was the only ordained priest among them, and he also
had exceptional gifts, John Wesley soon became the leader of that group
which other students mocked as a “holy club” and—because of their
methodical style of life—“methodists.”
    That was the story of that young priest who now, in distant Georgia,
doubted the depth of his faith. As a pastor, he failed miserably, for he
expected his parishioners to behave like the “holy club,” and his flock
expected him to be content with their attendance at worship. John’s brother
Charles, who was also in Georgia serving under James Oglethorpe, was
disappointed with his work, and decided to return to England. But John
stayed on, not because he had greater success, but because he would not
give up. Then he was forced to leave under a cloud. A young woman whom
he had courted had married another. Wesley, deeming the young bride
frivolous, denied communion to her, and was sued for defamation.
Confused and bitter, he decided to return home, which in any case seems to
have been what his parishioners wanted.
    Back in England, not knowing what to do, he contacted the Moravians.
One of them, Peter Boehler, became his religious advisor. Wesley came to
the conclusion that he lacked saving faith, and that therefore he should
cease preaching. Boehler advised him to continue preaching faith until he
had it, and once he had it, to continue preaching because he had it. Finally,
on May 24, 1738, Wesley had the experience that changed his life:

   In the evening I went very unwillingly to a society in Aldersgate
   Street, where one was reading Luther’s preface to the Epistle to the
   Romans. About a quarter before nine, while he was describing the
   change which God works in the heart through faith in Christ, I felt
   my heart strangely warmed. I felt I did trust in Christ, Christ alone
   for salvation: And an assurance was given me, that he had taken
   away my sins, even mine, and saved me from the law of sin and
   death.11




 The methodical life of the members of the Holy Club at Oxford earned its members the moniker of
                                           “methodists.”

    After that experience, Wesley no longer doubted his own salvation.
Furthermore, that salvation no longer consumed all his interest. Being
assured of it, he could devote all his concern to the salvation of others. As a
first step, he visited the Moravian community of Herrnhut. That visit,
although greatly inspiring, convinced him that Moravian spirituality was ill-
suited to his own temperament and involvement in social issues. Therefore,
in spite of his gratitude, he decided not to become a Moravian.
    While all this was taking place in Wesley’s life, another former member
of the “holy club,” George Whitefield, had become a famous preacher. A
few years earlier he had been moved by an experience similar to Wesley’s
at Aldersgate, and now divided his time between his parish in Georgia and
preaching in England, where he had remarkable success, particularly in the
industrial city of Bristol. His preaching was emotional, and when some
critics objected to the manner in which he used the pulpit he began
preaching in the open, as was often done in Georgia. Since he needed help
in Bristol, and in any case would soon have to return to the New World,
Whitefield invited Wesley to help him and take charge during his absence.
    Although Wesley accepted Whitefield’s invitation, the fiery preacher’s
methods were not entirely to his liking. He objected to preaching in the
open. Much later he commented on those early days, declaring that at that
time he was so convinced that God wished everything to be done in order,
that he almost thought it a sin to save souls outside of church buildings.
Slowly, in view of the results, he reconciled himself to that sort of
preaching, although he always deplored the need for it. He was also worried
about the response to his preaching. Some people would weep and loudly
bemoan their sins, while others would collapse in anguish. Then they would
express great joy, declaring that they felt cleansed of their evil. Wesley
would have preferred more solemn proceedings. Eventually, he decided that
what was taking place in such instances was a struggle between Satan and
the Holy Spirit, and that he should not hinder the work of God. In any case,
after the early years such extreme occurrences became less frequent.
    Wesley and Whitefield worked together for some time, although slowly
Wesley became the main leader of the movement. Eventually, they parted
because of theological differences. Both were Calvinists in most matters;
but, on the issue of predestination and free will, Wesley departed from
orthodox Calvinism, preferring the Arminian position. After several
debates, the two friends decided that each would follow his own path, and
that they would avoid controversies—an agreement that their followers did
not always keep. With the help of the Countess of Huntingdon, Whitefield
organized the Calvinist Methodist Church, which was strongest in Wales.
    Wesley had no interest in founding a new denomination. On the
contrary, he was an Anglican minister, and throughout his life he remained
such. Rather, his purpose was to awaken and cultivate the faith of the
masses in the Church of England, as Pietism was doing for German
Lutheranism. For that reason he avoided scheduling his preaching in
conflict with the services of the Church of England, and he always took for
granted that Methodist meetings would serve as preparation to attend
Anglican worship and take communion in it. For him, as for most of the
church through the centuries, the center of worship was communion. This
he took and expected his followers to take as frequently as possible, in the
official services of the Church of England.
    Although the movement had no intention of becoming a separate church,
it did need an organization. In Bristol, the real birthplace of the movement,
Wesley’s followers were organized into societies that at first met in private
homes and later had their own buildings. When Methodist societies grew
too large for the effective care of their members, Wesley followed a friend’s
suggestion and divided them into classes, each with eleven members and a
leader. These met weekly to read Scripture, pray, discuss religious matters,
and collect funds. Since, in order to be a class leader, it was not necessary to
be wealthy or educated, this gave significant participation to many who felt
left out of the structure of the Church of England. Also, since there were
classes for women, under feminine leadership, this also gave women a
prominent place in Methodism.
    The movement grew rapidly, and Wesley was forced to travel throughout
the British Isles, preaching and organizing his followers. When the bishop
of Bristol tried to limit his activity, telling him that his itinerant preaching
perturbed the order of the parishes, Wesley responded, “The world is my
parish.” Those words, originally uttered in protest against a rigid
ecclesiastical organization, later became the motto of the Methodist
missionary enterprise. Meanwhile, however, Wesley and his young
movement needed more people to share in the task of preaching. A few
Anglican priests had joined the movement. Most noteworthy among them
was John Wesley’s brother Charles, famous for his hymns—including O for
a Thousand Tongues to Sing, Hark, the Herald Angels Sing, Christ the Lord
is Risen Today, and Love Divine, All Loves Excelling. It was John Wesley,
however, who carried the heaviest burden, preaching several times a day
and traveling thousands of miles on horseback every year, until the age of
seventy.
    These circumstances led to the use of lay preachers. When Wesley heard
that layman Thomas Maxfield had been preaching in one of the societies in
London, he planned to put a stop to it. But his mother, Susanna, asked him
to hear the man before making a decision, and Maxfield so impressed
Wesley that he decided that the use of lay preachers was God’s answer to
the movement’s urgent need for preachers. These were not to take the place
of the clergy, for they were not to offer communion, and this was the
highest form of worship. Their function, like those of the societies, was
intended to be parallel and complementary to the sacramental function of
the Church of England and its ordained personnel. Among these Methodist
lay preachers there were soon a number of women—which was not then
possible among the ordained clergy.
    With all these elements in place, Wesley organized his followers into a
Connection. A number of societies joined to form a circuit, under the
leadership of a superintendent. To aid in the administration of the
Connection, Wesley began holding periodic meetings that included both the
Anglican clergy who formed part of it, and the lay preachers. This
eventually evolved into the Annual Conference, in which those who were to
serve in each circuit were appointed—usually for a period of three years.
    In this entire process, conflicts were not lacking. In the early years, there
were frequent acts of violence against Methodists. Some of the clergy and
the nobility resented the authority the new movement gave to people from
the lower classes. Meetings were frequently interrupted by paid ruffians,
and Wesley’s life was occasionally in danger. Later, this opposition abated,
until it eventually ceased. There were also theological conflicts. Wesley
grudgingly broke with the Moravians, whose inclination to Quietism he
feared and deplored.
    But the most significant conflicts were with the Anglican Church, to
which Wesley belonged and in which he wished to remain. Until his last
days, he reprimanded Methodists who wished to break away from
Anglicanism. But the breach was unavoidable. Among the Anglican
authorities, some rightly saw the Methodist movement as an indication of
their own shortcomings, and therefore resented it. Others felt that the
Methodists’ breach of order in preaching everywhere, without regard for
parish boundaries, was unforgivable. Wesley himself was enough of an
Anglican to bemoan the need to do this; but he felt compelled by the urge to
reach people whom the church was not reaching.
    A difficult legal decision came to make matters more tense. According
to English law, non-Anglican worship services and church buildings were to
be allowed, but they must be officially registered as such. This put the
Methodists in a difficult situation, for the Church of England did not
acknowledge their meetings and buildings. If they registered, this would be
a tacit declaration that they were not Anglicans. If they did not, they would
be breaking the law. In 1787, after great hesitation, Wesley instructed his
preachers to register, and thus the first legal step was taken toward the
formation of a separate church. Three years earlier, however, Wesley had
taken a step that had more drastic theological implications. For a long time,
as a serious student of patristics, Wesley had been convinced that in the
early church a bishop was the same as a presbyter or elder. This led him to
the conviction that all ordained presbyters, including himself, had the power
of ordination. But he refrained from employing it to avoid further alienating
the leadership of the Church of England. The independence of the United
States, however, posed new difficulties. During the War of Independence
most of the Anglican clergy had been Loyalists, and after independence
most of them had returned to England. This made it difficult—and
sometimes impossible—for the inhabitants of the new nation to partake in
communion. The bishop of London, who supposedly still had jurisdiction
over the former colonies, refused to ordain personnel for the United States.
Wesley deplored what he took to be the unwarranted rebellion of Britain’s
former colonies, both because he was a staunch supporter of the king’s
authority and because he could not fathom how the rebels could claim that
they were fighting for freedom while they themselves held slaves. Even so,
convinced as he was that the celebration of communion was the very heart
of Christian worship, Wesley felt that, no matter what the political stance of
people in the colonies might be, they must not be deprived of the sacrament.
Finally, in 1784, he ordained two lay preachers as presbyters for the new
country, and made Anglican priest Thomas Coke their superintendent—a
word that he well knew had the same meaning as the Greek word translated
as bishop. Later, he ordained others to serve also in Scotland and elsewhere.
In spite of having taken these steps, Wesley continued insisting on the need
to avoid breaking with the Church of England. His brother Charles told him
that the ordination of ministers for the New World was in itself a break. In
1786, the conference decided that, in those places where the Anglican
churches hadn’t the room for the entire population, or where their priests
were inept, it was permitted to schedule Methodist gatherings in conflict
with Anglican worship. Although Wesley refused to acknowledge it, by the
time of his death Methodism was clearly becoming a separate church.
    The success of Methodism in England was partly due to the degree to
which it responded to new needs resulting from the Industrial Revolution.
During the latter half of the eighteenth century, England was undergoing a
process of rapid industrialization. This created a mass movement of the
population to the industrial centers. Such people, uprooted by economic
circumstances, tended to lose their connections with the church, whose
parish structure was unable to respond to the needs of the new urban
masses. It was among those masses that Methodism filled a need and found
most of its members.
    In North America, a completely different process—the westward
movement of settlers—gave rise to an uprooted population lacking
traditional ecclesiastic links, and whom the older churches seldom reached.
It was among these people that Methodism achieved its greatest success.
Officially, North American Methodists became a separate church before
their British counterpart. In 1771, Wesley had sent lay preacher Francis
Asbury to the colonies. Asbury was the driving force behind Methodism
moving westward along with the frontier. When the thirteen colonies
declared their independence, Wesley wrote against their rebellion. But
American Methodist preachers were mostly colonials who supported the
cause of independence, or at least remained neutral. As a result, Methodists
in the United States, while still admiring Wesley, were no longer bound by
his wishes. It was against those wishes, and in response to the lack of
Anglican ministers, that the American movement organized itself into the
Methodist Episcopal Church. The name Episcopal was the direct result of a
conflict with Wesley, who called both himself and Coke superintendents,
but was enraged when he learned that Coke and Asbury—by then also a
superintendent—called themselves bishops. From that point on, American
Methodists have had bishops, and English Methodists have not.
   Wesley died in 1791. After his death, Methodism underwent a period of
inner struggles, mostly revolving around the question of relations with
Anglicanism. Eventually, in England as well as in other lands where
Methodism had grown strong, Methodist churches were formed that were
completely independent of Anglicanism.
                                     25

                  The Thirteen Colonies


   God requires not a uniformity of religion to be enacted and enforced
   in any civil state, which enforced uniformity, sooner or later, is the
   greatest occasion of civil war, ravishing of conscience, persecution of
   Christ Jesus in his servants, and of the hypocrisy and destruction of
   millions of souls.


ROGER WILLIAMS

The sixteenth century had seen the building of the Spanish and Portuguese
empires—each on its agreed side of the Treaty of Tordesillas, signed in
1494 and modified in 1506. In North America, the Spanish Empire included
New Spain (Mexico), which at the time extended well into what is now the
western half of the United States. In the seventeenth century, however, other
powers began building their own empires. In North America, the French
settled in Quebec in 1609. But the most successful of the new colonial
powers was Great Britain, whose overseas expansion began in the
seventeenth century and reached its peak in the nineteenth. Among its first
overseas enterprises were the thirteen colonies in North America that would
later become the United States.
    It is customary to contrast the origin of these colonies with the Spanish
ones, and to try to explain their divergent results by those different origins.
It is commonly said, for instance, that the Spanish came for gold whereas
the British came for religious motives; that the Spanish were cruel to the
Indians, but the British tried to live in peace with them; that the Spanish
brought the Inquisition, while the British brought religious freedom; and
that the Spanish came as aristocrats, and became rich on the basis of Indian
labor, and that the English came to work the land. Although there is a
measure of truth in some of these assertions, historical facts are much more
complex.
    The economic motivations of the British colonial enterprise were just as
strong as those of the Spanish. But the fact was that the Spanish had already
conquered the richest empires, and there were no longer treasures to be had
as great as those of the Aztecs and the Incas. Nor were there large
populations that could be forced to work for the colonizers. Most of the
natives of the thirteen colonies—and beyond—were organized in nomadic
or semi-nomadic tribes, and therefore could simply flee into the interior to
avoid becoming servants or slaves to the settlers. Therefore, British
investors could not hope to become rich by sheer conquest, as Cortez and
Pizarro had done, nor by exploiting Indian labor, as the Spanish settlers did,
but instead were forced to set their store in commerce. When it became
clear that trade with the Indians would not produce the necessary returns,
the colonies turned to agriculture, still with a view to exporting the produce
to Europe and thus making a profit for the owners of the colonies. This was
done with British labor. Generally, these were not free colonists cultivating
their own land, but indentured labor working the land owned by a colonial
company. At first, colonials were not even allowed to own land. As to
religious freedom, while it is true that Rhode Island and Pennsylvania led
the world in that direction, it is also true that the Pilgrims of New England
were no more tolerant than the Spanish inquisitors. Finally, on the matter of
mistreatment of Indians, one must not forget that the destruction of the
original population in what eventually became the United States was much
more thorough than that perpetrated by the Spanish in their colonies—with
the exception of the Caribbean. This had little to do with one nation or the
other expressing greater compassion. Rather, it was a matter of diverse
economic circumstances. What the Spanish wanted from the Indians was
their labor, and therefore they had no interest in decimating them. The
British wanted their land; therefore, most often, in both the colonial period
and after independence, they followed a policy of extermination and
confinement. In areas where the goal of the Spanish and Portuguese was
also to obtain land, they followed similar policies.
    It is true that new circumstances in Europe—particularly in Great Britain
—led many to migrate to the New World for religious reasons. In speaking
of the Puritan Revolution in England, we have seen the great variety of
religious persuasions that appeared. Such variety had no place in the
policies of governments whose goal was religious uniformity as a means to
political stability. Laws demanding religious conformity were more difficult
to apply overseas; therefore, religious dissidents hoped for an escape from
oppression by migrating to the colonies, or by founding new ones. Some of
these dissidents were no more tolerant than were the governments from
which they were fleeing. But others came to the conclusion that religious
tolerance was best, not only as a matter of convenience, but also because it
was God’s will.

                                 VIRGINIA
The first British colonial ventures in North America failed. In 1584, Sir
Walter Raleigh, Queen Elizabeth’s favorite, was granted a royal charter for
the colonization of North America. He named the area that he hoped to
colonize Virginia, in honor of Elizabeth, the Virgin Queen. But his two
ventures, one in 1585 and another in 1587, did not succeed. The first
contingent of settlers returned to England, and the second simply
disappeared.
   It was in the spring of 1607 that the permanent colonization of Virginia
began. In May of that year, 105 settlers landed near the mouth of a river that
they named James after their new king—Elizabeth had died four years
earlier—and founded Jamestown. There was a chaplain among them, for
the Virginia Company, under whose auspices the enterprise was taking
place, hoped to establish the Church of England in the new land, and to
offer its services both to the settlers and to the Indians. It was also hoped
that the new colony would put a stop to Spanish expansion to the north,
feared both for nationalist reasons and for dread of “popery.” The colony’s
main purpose, however, was not religious but economic—to the degree that
the Church of England never had a settled bishop in Virginia or in the rest
of the thirteen colonies. The stockholders of the Virginia Company simply
hoped that trade with the Indians, and perhaps agriculture, would yield a
handsome profit.
    Since the founding of Virginia took place at the high point of Puritan
influence in the Church of England, many of the stockholders and settlers
believed that the colony should be ruled by Puritan principles. Its early laws
required attendance at worship twice a day, the strict observance of the
Lord’s Day, and stern punishment for profanity and immodest dress. But
dreams of a holy commonwealth would have to yield to political realities.
King James detested Puritanism, and would not have it in his colony,
Virginia. A war with the Indians in 1622 served as an excuse, and in 1624
he placed the colony under his direct rule. After that time Puritan influence
waned. Later Charles I, following James’s policy against the Virginia
Puritans, took a vast portion of Virginia, created the colony of Maryland,
and granted it to a Catholic proprietor. Meanwhile the colony, at first a
marginal enterprise, had found economic success by growing and exporting
tobacco. Since this required much labor, by 1619 the colony began
importing slaves from Africa. Thus began the slave-holding economy that
became characteristic of Virginia and other colonies.
    The Puritan Revolution in England made little impact on Virginia. By
then settlers were more interested in growing tobacco and opening new
lands for cultivation than in the religious strife in England. Their former
Puritan zeal had lost its vigor in the midst of economic prosperity. In
particular, the Puritan valuation of labor had little meaning in a society
based on slavery. Therefore, when the revolution broke out in England, and
later when the Stuarts were restored, these events did not shake the colony.
Most of the settlers were still members of the Church of England. This was
no longer the Puritan Anglicanism of times past, but rather a facile and
aristocratic Anglicanism, one easily adapted to the plantation owners, but
with little influence on the slaves or on the lower classes of the white
population.
    The Church of England did little for the conversion of slaves. One of the
reasons for this was that there were ancient principles prohibiting Christians
from holding fellow believers in slavery, and some insisted that those
principles were still valid. Therefore, to avoid difficulties, slave masters
preferred that their slaves not be baptized. In 1667, a law was passed
declaring that baptism did not change a slave’s condition—another
indication of the degree to which established religion was willing to bend to
the interests of the powerful. But even then, little was done for the
conversion of the slaves, since many owners felt that keeping them in
ignorance was the best way to assure their service and submission.
    The adaptation of the church to the interests of the powerful also had
consequences among the white population. While the nascent aristocracy
remained faithful to Anglicanism, many in the lower classes began turning
to dissident movements. Severe measures were taken against them, and
hundreds migrated to nearby Catholic Maryland, where there was greater
religious freedom. The Quakers also made inroads in Virginia, in spite of
laws against them. When George Fox visited the colony in 1762, he
rejoiced in finding many Friends, and also noted that, although the
movement had been most successful among the lower classes, some of the
aristocracy regarded it with favor. Later, through the efforts of Asbury and
his preachers, Methodism made great strides—although at that time it still
considered itself a part of Anglicanism.
    Other colonies were founded to the south of Virginia. The Carolinas,
granted by the crown to a group of aristocrats and stockholders in 1663,
were slow in developing. In order to foster immigration, the proprietors
decreed religious freedom, thus attracting many dissidents from Virginia.
The society that developed in the Carolinas—particularly in South Carolina
—was similar to that of Virginia in its stratification. Again, the higher
classes belonged to the Church of England, while many in the lower classes
became either Quaker or Baptist. But even among the white population,
most people seem to have had very little contact with any church.
    Georgia was founded with two basic purposes in mind. The first was to
halt the Spanish, who were moving north from their base in St. Augustine.
The second was to serve as an alternative for debtors’ prisons. By the
beginning of the eighteenth century, there were many religious-minded
people in England who sought to better the lot of the disinherited. This
movement turned its attention, among other things, to prisons, whose
inhuman conditions were the object of repeated attacks in Parliament. One
of the leaders of this campaign was military hero James Oglethorpe, who
decided that a colony should be founded in North America that could serve
as an alternative to the incarceration of debtors. Royal approval was granted
in 1732, and the first convicts arrived the following year. To these were
soon added others, as well as many religious refugees from other areas.
Although Anglicanism was the official religion, it made little impact on the
colony. The failure of the Wesleys as Anglican pastors was typical of many
others. The Moravians had a measure of success, although their number was
never large. Perhaps the most significant religious movement in the early
years of the Georgia colony was the popular response to George
Whitefield’s preaching, similar to what was taking place in England. By the
time of his death in 1770, he had left his stamp on much of Georgia’s
religious life. Later, Methodists, Baptists and others harvested what he had
sown.

                THE NORTHERN PURITAN COLONIES
It was much farther north that Puritanism made its greatest impact. There,
in what came to be called New England, several colonies were founded
whose basic original motivation was clearly religious. The first of these was
the Plymouth Plantation, founded by a group of dissidents who had left
England for the Netherlands, and then developed the idea of founding in the
New World a community based on their religious principles. They came to
an agreement with the Virginia Company, which was in urgent need of
settlers, and among whose members there was strong Puritan influence.
Finally, 101 settlers boarded the Mayflower and left for the New World.
They reached land much farther north than they had intended, well beyond
the limits of Virginia. Therefore, before landing they decided to organize
themselves into a political body under the king of England but with the
power to govern themselves. In their Mayflower Compact, they committed
themselves to obey the “just and equal laws” passed by their own
government. Then, after a tentative landing on Cape Cod, they settled at
Plymouth. The first months of the new colony were tragic. The population
was swept by an epidemic and only fifty survived. In the spring, however,
the Indians taught the settlers how to grow corn; and with that crop, as well
as by fishing and hunting, they set by enough stores to see them through the
following winter. Eventually, they were also able to trade fur for things they
needed from Europe, and thus the colony managed to survive.
    Shortly after that first settlement, a group of English Puritans, wishing to
found in the New World a community more akin to their conscience,
organized the Massachusetts Bay Company. They agreed that they would
take the company with them to the New World and establish its
headquarters in the colony, thus hoping to avoid undue interference from
the English government. When all was ready, more than a thousand settlers
began the new colony. Unlike the Pilgrims of Plymouth, they were not
separatists, but simply Puritans who still belonged to the Church of England
yet wished to follow more closely the practices of the New Testament.
Since they saw little hope for this in England, they migrated to America,
where they expected to bring their ideals to fruition. This project was
rendered all the more necessary by Archbishop Laud’s measures against the
Puritans. During his persecution, some ten thousand Puritans fled to New
England, thus strengthening the colony of Massachusetts Bay, and giving
birth to the new colonies of Connecticut and New Haven.
    Charles I was preparing to take measures against these growing centers
of Puritanism when he found himself involved in the civil war that cost him
his throne and his life. But the war itself, and the Puritan victory, halted the
migratory wave, for there was now hope of establishing the holy
commonwealth, no longer on the distant shores of an unexplored continent,
but in England itself. Although their sympathies were clearly on the side of
the Puritan rebels, the colonies remained neutral, and devoted their efforts
to increasing their territories and developing their institutions. Therefore,
the restoration of the Stuarts was not as severe a blow for them as it was for
Puritanism in England. Somewhat later, James II attempted to consolidate
several of the northern colonies into the Dominion of New England. But his
fall put an end to this project, and the colonies recovered many of their old
privileges, although under new structures of government. It was at this time
that religious tolerance was granted, although by royal decision, and not at
the request of the settlers.
    The Puritan colonies of New England—by then consolidated under the
names Massachusetts and Connecticut—saw a number of theological
controversies. The main difficulty was that many of these Puritans, while
preserving the custom of baptizing children, insisted on the need of a
conversion experience in order to be truly Christian. What, then, was the
meaning of baptism? Would it not be better to wait until a person had the
experience of conversion, and then administer baptism, as the Baptists
claimed? Some found that to be the best solution. But this clashed with the
Puritan goal of founding a society that would be guided by biblical
principles. A Christian commonwealth is conceivable only if, as in ancient
Israel, one becomes a member of it by birth, so that the civil and the
religious communities are coextensive. For that reason, it was necessary to
baptize the “children of the covenant,” just as in ancient Israel they had
been circumcised during infancy. But, on the other hand, if all who were
baptized were members of the covenant, how could purity of life and
doctrine be safeguarded? Furthermore, if infants were baptized as “children
of the covenant,” what was to be done with infants born of baptized parents
who never had the experience of conversion? Thus, many came to the
conclusion that there was a “half-way covenant,” embracing those who,
having been baptized, had not been converted. The children of such people
were to be baptized, for they were still members of the covenant. But only
those who had experienced a conversion were granted full membership in
the church, and were vested with the power to participate in the process of
making decisions. In any case, this controversy gave rise to bitter
animosities, and as a result the original optimism of the settlers waned.
There was also some debate as to the manner of government of the
churches, and the relations between them. Finally, the majority settled on
what amounted to congregational rule, although limited by the need for all
congregations to agree to a Confession of Faith that was a revision of that
of Westminster, and which the civil authorities were empowered to
safeguard.
    One of the most famous episodes of those early years was the trial of the
“witches” of Salem, Massachusetts. Before those events, there had been
other trials for witchcraft in Massachusetts, and three people had been
hanged as a result. But in 1692, on the basis of the idle accusations of some
young girls, rumors began circulating that witchcraft was widely practiced
in Salem, and the rumors eventually led to hysteria. In total, twenty people
—fourteen women and six men—were hanged, and several others died in
prison. Some confessed that they had practiced witchcraft, and accused
others of having been their mentors, thus hoping to save their lives.
Eventually, accusations were leveled against respected members of the
clergy, wealthy merchants, and even the governor’s wife. At that point, the
authorities decided that it was time to stop the investigations. Twenty years
later, the courts of Massachusetts decided that the entire episode had been a
gross injustice, and ordered indemnifications to be paid to the families of
the victims. During the affair, two of the most influential religious leaders
in New England were Increase Mather and his son Cotton. Increase (1639–
1723) who came to serve as president of Harvard College, believed in the
existence and power of witchcraft, and has been blamed for much of the
Salem episode. On the other hand, he severely criticized the actual
proceedings and the nature of the evidence leading to the condemnation of
the “witches.” His son Cotton took a similar position, writing against
witchcraft and then deploring the manner in which the trials were
conducted. Many have seen a connection between the Mathers’s stringent
views on women and on sexuality, and their attitude regarding witchcraft.
The work of these two theologians, however, went far beyond the question
of witchcraft, so that they—particularly Cotton, who wrote more that four
hundred books and pamphlets—set the tone of the ethos of Puritan New
England. In particular, much of what the Mathers said about women left its
mark on a society that already limited the role of women. Even so, from the
early years of the colony, women began to find new roles and means of
expression, as may be seen in the work of the first American poet, Anne
Bradstreet (1612–1672).
    Some of the settlers did show an interest in the evangelization of their
Indian neighbors. Remarkable on that score was the Mayhew family, who
settled on Martha’s Vineyard and worked for the conversion and education
of the Indians for five generations—from 1642 until the death of Zacharias
Mayhew, in 1806. However, the work that John Eliot began among the
Mohicans in 1646 was of greater consequence. He was convinced that the
Indians were the lost tribes of Israel, and that their conversion would bring
about the fulfillment of ancient prophecies. He therefore gathered his
converts in villages that were ruled according to the law of Moses. There he
taught them European agricultural methods and mechanical arts, so that the
communities could sustain themselves. Great stress was also placed on the
reading and study of the Bible, which Eliot translated into Mohican after
having laboriously learned that language and devised a method for writing
it. Eliot himself founded fourteen such villages, and those who followed his
inspiration founded many more.
    In 1675, some Indians, under the leadership of a chief whom they called
“King Philip,” decided to put an end to the outrages being committed
against them, and to the progressive invasion of their lands. In the conflict
that ensued, known as King Philip’s War, many of the converted Indians
either took the side of the settlers or refrained from fighting. In spite of this,
hundreds of them were kidnapped from their villages and forced to live on
an overcrowded island in Boston Bay. Many others were killed by whites
who felt that all Indians were enemies. When the settlers finally won the
war, the captive Indians and those who surrendered were distributed among
the whites—women and children to be their servants, and men as slaves to
be sold and shipped as far away as possible. Few traces of Eliot’s work
remained after these events.

                  RHODE ISLAND AND THE BAPTISTS
The intolerance that reigned in the Puritan colonies forced some to abandon
them. Most famous among these was Roger Williams, who had arrived in
Massachusetts in 1631. After refusing to serve as a pastor in Boston, he
declared that the Puritans in the colony erred in granting the civil authorities
power to enforce those commandments that had to do with an individual’s
relationship with God. He was convinced that magistrates should be granted
authority to enforce only those commandments that had to do with the
ordering of society. He also declared that the land the colonies occupied
belonged to the Indians, and that the entire colonial enterprise was unjust
and illegal. These and other ideas, which at the time seemed radical, made
Williams unpopular in Boston, and he moved to Plymouth. He became a
pastor in Salem. But when he attempted the secession of his church, the
authorities of Massachusetts expelled him. He then settled with a group of
friends, first in Plymouth, and then in Narragansett, on lands that he bought
from the Indians. There he founded the colony of Providence on the
principle of religious freedom.
    According to Williams, such freedom was required as part of the very
obligation to worship God. Worship must be sincere, and all efforts to force
it actually weaken it. Therefore, in the new colony the rights of citizenship
would not be abridged on the basis of one’s religious opinions or practices,
and there would be a clear separation between church and state. These
views he expounded in a treatise published in 1644, The Bloudy Tenent of
Persecution for the Cause of Conscience Discussed, to which one of the
main pastors of Massachusetts responded with The Bloudy Tenent Washed
and Made White in the Bloud of the Lambe.
    Meanwhile, others had moved to nearby areas for similar reasons. Late
in 1637, prophet Anne Hutchinson was expelled from Massachusetts for,
among other reasons, claiming to have received personal revelations. She
and eighteen others founded Portsmouth on an island near Providence, also
on the basis of religious freedom. Shortly thereafter, a group from
Portsmouth founded the community of Newport, at the other end of the
same island. All these communities grew rapidly with the influx of Baptists,
Quakers, and others from the Puritan colonies. But the only legal claim of
these new settlements was based on having bought their lands from the
Indians, and many in the nearby colonies spoke of wanting to destroy what
they considered the sewer of New England. Therefore, Roger Williams
traveled to England, and in 1644 obtained from the Long Parliament the
legal recognition of the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
to be governed as a democracy. After the restoration of the Stuarts, Charles
II confirmed the colony’s legal rights.
    Williams’s church in Providence became Baptist. One of its members
baptized Williams, who in turn baptized the others. But Williams himself
did not remain in that church for long, for his ideas were becoming
increasingly radical. His contacts with the Indians, whom he deeply
respected, led him to declare that perhaps their religion was as acceptable in
the eyes of God as was Christianity, and that in any case they did not have
to become Christians in order to be saved. This attracted further attacks, not
only from the Puritans of Massachusetts, but also from many Baptists in
Providence. But he continued moving toward a radical spiritualism that
eventually led him to the conclusion that all churches were false, and that
Scripture was to be understood in purely spiritual terms.
    Meanwhile, the Baptists of Providence were involved in their own
controversies. In speaking of the Puritan Revolution in England, we had
occasion to speak of the Baptists as one of the many groups that appeared at
that time. Although some of their teachings coincided with those of the
Anabaptists on the Continent, most Baptists did not derive such ideas from
the Anabaptists, but rather from their own study of the New Testament.
While in exile in the Netherlands, a number of these Baptists were
influenced by Arminianism, which they took with them on their return to
England. Others remained in England, and continued sharing in the strict
Calvinism that formed the backbone of the Puritan movement. Thus, two
different groups appeared among the Baptists: the general and the
particular. General Baptists were those who held, as did the Arminians,
that Jesus had died for all humankind. Particular Baptists, on the other
hand, held to orthodox Calvinism, affirming that Jesus died only for those
individuals who were predestined to be saved. In Providence, some
followed the Arminianism of the General Baptists, and others the Calvinism
of the Particular Baptists.
    The Baptist movement spread throughout the colonies, even though its
followers were persecuted in several of them. Entire congregations were
expelled from Massachusetts. This did not suffice to stop the supposed
contagion, which infected some of the most prestigious members of that
society—including the president of Harvard. Slowly, as religious tolerance
became more common, Baptist groups surfaced in every colony. At first,
most of these were General Baptists. But at the time of the Great
Awakening—to which we shall return—there was an upsurge of Calvinism,
and in many areas the Particular Baptists far surpassed the others.

                     CATHOLICISM IN MARYLAND
The main center of Roman Catholicism in the North American British
colonies was Maryland. In 1632, Charles I granted Cecil Calvert, Lord
Baltimore, rights of property and colonization over a portion of the
territories that had earlier been claimed by Virginia. Lord Baltimore was
Catholic, and the grant was made to him as part of Charles’s policy of
seeking Catholic support. Many Catholics in England wished to have a
colony where they could live without the restrictions and difficulties they
constantly faced in their own country. Since at that time it would have been
politically unwise to establish a purely Catholic colony, it was decided that
in Maryland there would be religious freedom. Lord Baltimore followed
that policy in his instructions to his representatives in Maryland, whom he
directed to avoid giving Protestants any excuse to attack the Catholics in the
colony.
    The first group of settlers arrived in 1634, and its social composition
predicted the prevailing social order in the colony. Approximately one-tenth
of the settlers were Catholic aristocrats, and the rest were mostly their
Protestant servants. Tobacco soon became the mainstay of the economy,
giving rise to large and prosperous plantations. The colony was governed by
the Catholic landowners, but the majority of its residents were Protestants.
Repeatedly, whenever the shifting political winds in Britain gave them
opportunity, the Protestants sought to take power from the landed Catholic
aristocracy. They finally succeeded when James II was overthrown.
Anglicanism then became the official religion of the colony, and the rights
of Catholics were restricted.
    Pennsylvania also had a significant number of Catholics, thanks to the
tolerant policies advocated by William Penn. There, as well as in other
colonies, Catholicism made significant gains after the Stuart restoration.
After the fall of James II in 1688, however, its growth was limited; and
throughout the colonial period Catholics remained a minority in each of the
thirteen colonies.

                   THE MID-ATLANTIC COLONIES
The colonies founded between New England and Maryland—New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware—did not initially serve as a
refuge for any particular religious group. We have already spoken of Penn’s
“experiment” in Pennsylvania. Although the basic inspiration for founding
the colony was Quaker, from the very beginning its people of varied
confessions comprised its population. The same was true of Delaware,
which Penn bought from the duke of York, and which was part of
Pennsylvania until 1701.
   The political and religious history of New Jersey is complex. In general,
however, east New Jersey followed the pattern of the strict New England
Puritans, while in the west it was the Quakers who set the tone for the
emerging society, and there was religious tolerance. Eventually, however,
many of the Quakers of New Jersey became a slaveholding aristocracy
whose relations with other Quakers were increasingly strained.
   What later became New York was colonized by the Dutch, whose East
India Company established its local headquarters in Manhattan, and whose
Reformed Church came with them. In 1655, they conquered a rival colony
that the Swedes had founded on the Delaware River, then they were
conquered by the British in 1664, and what had been New Netherland
became New York, while the earlier Dutch inhabitants, who in any case
were not entirely satisfied with the previous regime, became British
subjects. The British brought with them the Church of England, whose only
members were the governor and his household and troops. But with
increased British immigration, the religious composition of the colony
approached that of Great Britain.
    In short, during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Great Britain
founded and expanded a chain of colonies in North America. (In 1759, the
British also took the French lands north of the St. Lawrence, but the history
of that colony followed a different course.) Religious motivations played an
important role in the founding of several of these colonies. Although at first
some of them were intolerant of religious diversity, with the passage of time
all tended to follow the example of Rhode Island and Pennsylvania, where
religious freedom had existed from the beginning and was shown to be a
viable option to the religious tensions that had repeatedly bled Europe. At
the same time, the practice of slavery, social inequity based on the existence
of vast plantations, the exploitation of the Indians and the expropriation of
their land, and many similar factors, had dimmed the religious fervor and
the hopes for a holy commonwealth that had sparked many of the early
settlers.

                       THE GREAT AWAKENING
The eighteenth century brought to North America the same Pietistic
currents that it brought to Germany and England. Presbyterians, for
instance, were divided by a controversy between those who insisted above
all on strict adherence to the teachings of Westminster—the Old Side—and
those of the New Side, whose emphasis was on the experience of redeeming
grace. Although the two sides would eventually come together, for a time
the controversy led to schism—a schism that was made more acute by the
enormous Pietistic wave which became known as the Great Awakening.
    From an early date, many among the North American colonists had felt
that a personal religious experience was of great importance to Christian
life. But that feeling became more generalized by a series of events that
began in 1734, when the first signs of the Great Awakening appeared in
Northampton, Massachusetts. The pastor there was Jonathan Edwards, a
staunch Calvinist who had been trained at Yale and was convinced of the
need for a personal experience of conversion. He had been preaching in
Northampton for several years, with average results, when his preaching
began evoking a response that surprised him. His sermons were not
exceptionally emotive, although they did underscore the need for an
experience of conviction of sin and of divine forgiveness. In that year of
1734, people began responding to his sermons, some with emotional
outbursts, but many with a remarkable change in their lives, and with
increased attention to devotional practices. In a few months, the movement
swept the area and reached into Connecticut. Soon it subsided, and after
three years the extraordinary signs had almost disappeared. But the memory
remained, as well as the hope that it would be rekindled.
    Shortly thereafter, George Whitefield visited New England, and his
preaching led to many experiences of conversion as well as outward
expressions of repentance and joy. Although Edwards was a
Congregationalist, he invited the Anglican Whitefield to preach in his
church, and it is said that while the visitor preached, the pastor wept. This
gave the awakening renewed impetus. The Presbyterian ministers of the
New Side, and others of similar inclinations, joined it. While some
preachers followed Whitefield’s example, traveling throughout the
countryside, many local pastors of various traditions—Anglicans,
Presbyterians, and Congregationalists—brought new zeal to their pulpits,
and extraordinary responses were evoked in their churches as well. People
wept in repentance for their sins, some shouted for joy at having been
pardoned, and a few were so overwhelmed that they fainted.
    Such reactions to preaching led the enemies of the Great Awakening to
accuse its leaders of undermining the solemnity of worship, and of
substituting emotion for study and devotion. It must be said, however, that
many of the leaders of the movement were not particularly emotive, that
many were scholars, and that in any case the goal of the movement was not
worship services marked by continual shows of emotion, but rather a single
experience that would lead each believer to greater devotion and more
conscientious study of Scripture. This may be seen in Jonathan Edwards’s
sermons. They are not emotive harangues but careful expositions of
profound theological matters. Edwards believed that emotion was
important. But such emotion, including the high experience of conversion,
should not eclipse the need for right doctrine and rational worship. The
leaders of the Great Awakening were orthodox Calvinists. It was precisely
his Calvinism that led Whitefield to break with Wesley. And Edwards wrote
solid and profound defenses of the doctrine of predestination. Although the
movement in its early stages was led by Congregationalists and
Presbyterians, in the long run it was the Baptists and Methodists who most
profited from it.
   At first, the Baptists opposed the movement, calling it frivolous and
superficial. But the Awakening led many people to conclusions that were
favorable to the Baptists. Indeed, if an experience of conversion had such
central importance in Christian life, this raised doubts regarding infant
baptism. Therefore, many Congregationalists and Presbyterians, led by the
Awakening’s emphasis on personal experience, eventually rejected infant
baptism and became Baptists. Entire congregations did so.




Jonathan Edwards was both the leading theologian in the colonies and one of the prominent figures
                                   in the Great Awakening.

   The Great Awakening also led both Baptists and Methodists to the
Western frontier. At this time, whites were continually appropriating Indian
lands, and it was the Methodists and Baptists who, imbued with the spirit of
the Great Awakening, took up the task of preaching to these Western settlers
and organizing their religious life. For that reason, these two groups became
the most numerous in the newly settled areas. And, as a consequence of that
Great Awakening, and of later similar movements, the hope for an
“awakening” became typical of a significant sector of North American
Christianity.
    Finally, the Great Awakening had political consequences. This was the
first movement that embraced all of the thirteen colonies that would
eventually become the United States. Thanks to it, a sense of commonality
began developing among the various colonies. At the same time, new ideas
were circulating regarding human rights and the nature of government.
Those ideas, combined with the growing sense of commonality among the
colonies, would foment momentous events.




                   Suggested Readings


Sydney E. Ahlstrom. A Religious History of the American People. Second
  edition, David D. Hall, ed. Hew Haven: Yale University Press, 2004.
Carl Bangs. Arminius: A Study in the Dutch Reformation. Nashville:
  Abingdon, 1971.
Robert Bireley. The Jesuits and the Thirty Years’ War. Cambridge [Eng]:
  Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Francis J. Bremer. Puritanism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford:
  Clarendon Press, 2009.
Frederick C. Copleston. A History of Philosophy. Vols. 4–6. London:
  Burns, Oates and Washburne, 1958–1960.
Rupert E. Davies. Methodism. Baltimore: Penguin, 1963.
Janet Glenn Gray. The French Huguenots: Anatomy of Courage. Grand
  Rapids: Baker Book House, 1981.
Herbert H. Henson. Puritanism in England. London: Hodder and
  Stoughton, 1912.
Richard P. Heitzenrater. The People Called Methodists. Nashville:
  Abingdon, 1994.
Randy L. Maddox and Jason E. Vickers. The Cambridge Companion to
   John Wesley. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Henry Petersen. The Canons of Dort. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1968.
Meic Pearse. The Age of Reason: From the Wars of Religion to the French
   Revolution. Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 2006.
F. Ernest Stoeffler. German Pietism during the Eighteenth Century. Leiden:
   E.J. Brill, 1973.
N. M. Sutherland. The Huguenot Struggle for Recognition. New Haven:
   Yale University Press, 1980.
Henry Van Etten. George Fox and the Quakers. New York: Harper, 1959.
                        PART III


        BEYOND CHRISTENDOM




                      Chronology



Popes                 Events
Clement XIV (1769–    Captain Cook’s voyages (1775–1779)
1774)                 U. S. War of Independence (1775–1783)
Pius VI (1775–1799)   Steam engine (1776)
                      Tupac Amaru Rebellion (1780–1782)
                      Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason (1781)
                      Methodist Christmas Conference (1784)
                      National Assembly, France (1789)
                       Taking of the Bastille (1789)
                       Civil Constitution of the Clergy (1790)
                       Legislative Assembly, France (1791)
                       National Convention, France (1792)
                       Particular Baptist Society (1792)
                       King Louis XVI executed (1793)
                       Carey in India (1793)
                       Terror in France (1793–1795)
                       London Missionary Society (1795)
                       British take Ceylon (1796)
                       Second Great Awakening begins (1797)
                       Pius VI prisoner of France (1798)
                       Roman Republic (1798)
                       Consulate, France (1799)
                       Founding of Sierra Leone (1799)
                       Church Missionary Society (1799)
                       Schleiermacher’s Speeches (1799)
Pius VII (1800–1823)   Cane Ridge revival (1801)
                       Louisiana Purchase (1803)
                       Napoleon emperor (1804)
                       British and Foreign Bible Society (1804)
                       Independence of Haiti (1804)
                       British in Cape of Good Hope (1806)
                       Hegel’s Phenomenology of the Spirit (1807)
                       French occupy Rome (1808)
                       Joseph Bonaparte, King of Spain (1808)
                       Independence of Mexico (1810)
                       American Board of Commissioners (1810)
                       Independence of Paraguay and Venezuela
                       (1811)
                       British-American War (1812–1814)
                       Napoleon in Russia (1812)
                       Reorganization of the Jesuits (1814)
                       Waterloo (1815)
                       Independence of Río de la Plata (1816)
                      American Bible Society (1816)
                      Etsi longissimo (1816)
                      Gospel of Matthew in Burmese (1817)
                      Independence of Chile (1818)
                      James Long in Texas (1819)
                      Independence of Peru and Central America
                      (1821)
                      Schleiermacher’s Christian Faith (1821–1822)
Leo XII (1823–1829)   Monroe Doctrine (1823)
                      Etsi iam diu (1824)
                      Independence of Bolivia (1825)
                      American Society for the Promotion of
                      Temperance (1826)
                      Panama Congress (1826)
Pius VIII (1829–      Abolition of slavery in Mexico (1829)
1830)                 Book of Mormon (1830)
                      Comte’s Course of Positive Philosophy (1830–
                      1842)
Gregory XVI (1831–    Boer migration (1835)
1846)                 Republic of Texas (1836)
                      Abolition of slavery, British Caribbean (1838)
                      Opium War (1839–1842)
                      Brooke government in Sarawak (1841–1946)
                      Livingstone in Africa (1841)
                      Kierkegaard begins his work (1843)
                      Manifest Destiny (1845)
                      Methodists and Baptists split over slavery
                      (1845)
Pius IX (1846–1878)   Mexican-American War (1846–1848)
                      Independence of Liberia (1847)
                      Famine in Ireland, migration to U.S. (1847)
                      Second Republic in France (1848)
                      Communist Manifesto (1848)
                      Roman Republic (1849)
                      Taiping Rebellion (1850–1864)
                       Cavour’s government in Italy (1852–1861)
                       Napoleon III (1852–1870)
                       Dogma of Immaculate Conception of Mary
                       (1854)
                       Commodore Perry in Japan (1854)
                       Holly in Haiti (1855)
                       Darwin’s Origin of the Species (1859)
                       Kingdom of Italy (1861)
                       U.S. Civil War (1861–1865)
                       Presbyterians divide over slavery (1861)
                       Congregation of Eastern Rites (1862)
                       Bismarck chancellor (1862)
                       Salvation Army (1864)
                       Syllabus of Errors (1864)
                       Catholics persecuted in Korea (1865)
                       China Inland Mission (1865)
                       First Vatican Council (1869–1870)
                       Dogma of Papal Infallibility (1870)
                       Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871)
                       Third Republic in France (1870–1914)
                       Moody begins preaching (1872)
                       Mary Baker Eddy’s Science and Health (1875)
Leo XIII (1878–1903)
                       Protestant missionaries in Korea (1884)
                       Rerum novarum (1891)
                       U.S. Supreme Court approves segregation
                       (1892)
                       Five Fundamentals (1895)
                       Spanish-American War (1898)
                       Boxer Rebellion in China (1899–1901)
                       Freud’s psychoanalysis (1900)
Pius X (1903–1914)     Azusa Street Revival (1906)
                       Pascendi domini regis (1907)
                       Independence of Belgian Congo (1908)
                       U.S. Federal Council of Churches (1908)
                      Scofield’s Bible (1909)
                      N.A.A.C.P. founded (1909)
                      Japan annexes Korea (1910)
                      Methodist Pentecostal Church, Chile (1910)
                      World Missionary Conference, Edinburgh
                      (1910)
                      Fall of Chinese Empire (1912)
                      Assemblies of God (1914)
Benedict XV (1914–    World War I (1914–1918)
1922)                 Russian Revolution (1917)
                      Barth’s Commentary on Romans (1919)
                      U.S. Prohibition (1919–1933)
                      Women’s suffrage (1920)
Pius XI (1922–1939)   Mussolini in Rome (1922)
                      Founding of Zwischen den Zeiten (1922)
                      Stockholm Conference (Life and Work) (1925)
                      United Church of Canada (1925)
                      First six Chinese Catholic bishops (1926)
                      Lausanne Conference (Faith and Order) (1927)
                      Church of Christ in China (1927)
                      Mexico confiscates church property (1927)
                      Jerusalem Assembly, IMC (1928)
                      Stock Market Crash (1929)
                      Depression (1929)
                      H. R. Niebuhr’s Social Sources of
                      Denominationalism (1929)
                      Aulén’s Christus Victor (1930)
                      Nygren’s Agape and Eros (1930–1936)
                      Spanish Republic (1931)
                      Encyclical Quadragesimo anno (social
                      teachings) (1931)
                      Encyclical Non abbiamo bisogno (against
                      Fascism) (1931)
                      Barth’s Church Dogmatics (1932–1967)
                      Hitler comes to power (1933)
                       Vatican concordat with Germany (1933)
                       Roosevelt U.S. president (1933)
                       Barmen Declaration (1934)
                       Civil War in Spain (1936)
                       Encyclicals against Nazism and Communism
                       (1937)
                       Oxford Conference (Life and Work) (1937)
                       Edinburgh Conference (Faith and Order) (1937)
                       War between Japan and China (1937)
                       Bonhoeffer’s The Cost of Discipleship (1937)
                       H. R. Niebuhr’s The Kingdom of God in
                       America (1937)
                       Madras Assembly, IMC (1938)
Pius XII (1939–1958)   Franco’s victory in Spain (1939)
                       Bonhoeffer’s Life Together (1939)
                       World War II (1939–1945)
                       Bultmann’s The New Testament and Mythology
                       (1940)
                       Germany attacks Russia (1941)
                       United Church of Christ in Japan (1941)
                       Japan attacks Pearl Harbor (1941)
                       Niebuhr’s The Nature and Destiny of Man
                       (1941–1943)
                       Fall of Mussolini (1943)
                       Encyclical Divino afflante Spiritu (1943)
                       Perón comes to power in Argentina (1943)
                       †Bonhoeffer (1945)
                       Germany surrenders (1945)
                       Nuclear attack on Hiroshima (1945)
                       Independence of Philippines and Indonesia
                       (1945)
                       Fall of Vargas in Brazil (1945)
                       Church of South India (1947)
                       Whitby Assembly, IMC (1947)
                       World Council of Churches (WCC) founded
                    (1948)
                    †Mohandas K. Ghandi (1948)
                    People’s Republic of China (1949)
                    Dogma of Assumption of Mary (1950)
                    Korean War (1950)
                    Encyclical Humani generis (1950)
                    Billy Graham’s Evangelistic Association (1950)
                    Independence of India (1950)
                    Supreme Court bans segregation in public
                    schools (1952)
                    Willingen Assembly, IMC (1952)
                    Worker priest movement suspended (1954)
                    Evanston Assembly, WCC (1954)
                    †Teilhard de Chardin (1955)
                    Fall of Perón in Argentina (1955)
                    Conference of Latin American Bishops founded
                    (1955)
                    Independence of Ghana (1957)
                    Ghana Assembly, IMC (1957–1958)
John XXIII (1958–   Cuban Revolution (1959)
1963)               Pope announces intention to call a council
                    (1959)
                    Pope creates Secretariat for Christian Unity
                    (1960)
                    Independence of Seventeen African nations
                    (1960)
                    Encyclical Mater et Magistra (1961)
                    First manned space flight (1961)
                    New Delhi Assembly, WCC; IMC joins WCC
                    (1961)
                    Chilean Pentecostals join WCC (1961)
                    Independence of Algeria (1962)
                    †H. Richard Niebuhr (1962)
                    Robinson’s Honest to God (1963)
                      Second Vatican Council (1962–1965)
                      Moltmann’s Theology of Hope (1965)
Paul VI (1963–1978)   War in Southeast Asia escalates (1965)
                      Encyclical Humanae vitae (1968)
                      †Martin Luther King, Jr. (1968)
                      Medellín Assembly of CELAM (1968)
                      Uppsala Assembly, WCC (1968)
                      †Karl Barth (1968)
                      Astronauts land on the moon (1969)
                      †Reinhold Niebuhr (1970)
                      Gutiérrez’s Teología de la liberación (1971)
                      Chicago Declaration (1973)
                      Coup in Chile (1973)
                      Fall of Haile Selassie (1974)
                      Lausanne Covenant (1974)
                      Nairobi Assembly, WCC (1975)
John Paul I (1978)    Camp David Accords (1978)
John Paul II (1978–   Puebla Assembly, CELAM (1978)
2005)                 Organization of African Instituted Churches
                      (1978)
                      U.S.S.R. invades Afghanistan (1979)
                      Islamic Republic of Iran (1979)
                      Rhodesia becomes Zimbabwe (1979)
                      Consejo Latinoamericano de Iglesias (CLAI)
                      (1982)
                      Falkland-Malvinas War (1982)
                      Vancouver Assembly, WCC (1983)
                      †Karl Rahner (1984)
                      AIDS emerges (1984)
                      Collapse of the Soviet Union (1985–1991)
                      Fall of the Berlin Wall (1989)
                      Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing (1989)
                      U.S. invades Iraq (1991)
                      Canberra Assembly, WCC (1991)
                      Ratzinger to head Congregation of the Doctrine
                      of the Faith (1991)
                      European Union (1993)
                      Encyclical Ut unum sint (1995)
                      †Mother Theresa (1997)
                      Harare Assembly, WCC (1998)
                      †Hélder Câmara (1999)
                      Terrorist attacks on U.S. (2001)
                      War in Afghanistan (2001)
                      U.S. invades Iraq (2003)
                      Terrorist attack in Madrid (2004)
                      European Union adds ten new members (2004)
Benedict XVI (2005–
)                     Porto Alegre Assembly, WCC (2006)
                      China Patriotic Council bishops
                      excommunicated (2006)
                      Independence of Kosovo declared (2008)
                      Third Congress on World Evangelization(2010)
                                    26

            An Age Beyond Christendom


   Here ends the 18th Century. The 19th begins with a fine clear
   morning wind at S.W.; and the political horizon affords as fine a
   prospect . . . with the irresistible propagation of the Rights of Man,
   the eradication of hierarchy, superstition and tyranny over the world.
                               NATHANIEL AMES’S DIARY, DECEMBER 31, 1800



The last years of the eighteenth century, and the first of the nineteenth,
brought a series of political changes that shook Europe and the Western
hemisphere. In general, those changes were the result of the convergence of
the new political ideas with the economic interests of the growing
bourgeoisie. During the second half of the eighteenth century, in both
Europe and the Western hemisphere, the economic power of a new class
had increased. In France, this new class was the bourgeoisie, which had
come into its own with the growth of cities, trade, and industry. In the
Western hemisphere, riches were based on agriculture and the trade derived
from it; and therefore the colonials who owned the land had become the
new aristocracy of money. The interests of this aristocracy and of the
European bourgeoisie conflicted with those of the older aristocracy of
blood. In France, the lower classes were allied with the bourgeoisie in their
hatred of the aristocracy, whom they viewed as parasites living off the
products of their labor. In the New World, the lower classes were also allied
with the new economic aristocracy against the aristocracy of blood, whom
they saw as foreigners profiting from the colonies without understanding
their dreams and problems. All this resulted in the independence of the
United States, the French Revolution, and the independence of most of
Latin America. These revolutions mark the beginning of a new period in
history, and were followed by other revolutions throughout the nineteenth
century and well into the twentieth—in Germany and other parts of Europe
in 1848, in Mexico in 1910, in Russia in 1917, in Cuba in 1959, and in
Kenya leading to independence in 1963. . . . While the success of such
revolutions, and their long-term consequences, vary from case to case,
together they jointly show that the nineteenth and twentieth centuries were a
time of great political and social upheavals that would have a serious
impact on Christianity as a whole.
    Also, the nineteenth century was marked by a geographic expansion of
Christianity comparable only to that of the sixteenth. While the sixteenth
century was the great age of Catholic expansion, the nineteenth played a
similar role for Protestantism. Although the consequences of that vast
enterprise are still not clear, there is little doubt that, from the perspective of
the history of Christianity, the most important event of the nineteenth
century was the founding of a truly universal church in which peoples of all
races and nations had a part. On the other hand, however, it is necessary to
point out that this took place within the context of colonialism and
economic imperialism—a framework that also left its stamp on the life of
the church.
    At the opening of the nineteenth century, one could well have thought
that European colonialism had passed its zenith. This was particularly true
in the Western hemisphere, where European expansion had been most
remarkable in previous centuries. The independence of the United States
left Britain with no American colonies other than Canada, several islands in
the Caribbean, and relatively small holdings in Central and South America.
The French lost Haiti, until then their most productive colony. And Spain
had to relinquish all its American lands except Cuba and Puerto Rico—both
of which Spain would also lose by the turn of the century. Furthermore, the
bloodletting of the Napoleonic Wars seemed likely to put an end to
European hegemony in the world.
    But what happened was exactly the opposite. The Napoleonic Wars
turned Britain’s attention toward the colonies held by its enemies. When
Napoleon became master of the European continent, Britain was able to
survive thanks to its naval superiority. Its most powerful squadrons
protected it from invasion, while others sought to intercept trade between
Napoleon’s Europe—France, Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands—and its
colonies. British citizens learned to expect bad news from the armies that
opposed Napoleon on land, and good from the ships that harassed him on
the sea. When the wars ended, Britain found itself in possession of several
former French and Dutch colonies.
    These events coincided with the main reason for colonial expansion in
the nineteenth century: the Industrial Revolution. As technological
advances were applied to industrial production, greater capital and wider
markets became necessary. For a time, those areas of Europe that had not
been industrialized provided the necessary markets. But soon the industrial
powers began to look for other outlets, and found them in Latin America
and Asia.
    In Latin America, even after a period of national liberation, declarations
of independence and the establishment of national governments, these
circumstances led to neocolonialism—a system in which the colonizing
powers, rather than ruling directly over the colonized, allowed them a
measure of political independence while still exploiting them economically
and perpetuating their dependency. The former Spanish colonies had
scarcely won their independence when Britain, France, and the United
States began competing for control of the new markets. At first, foreign
investors were interested mainly in urban markets. But by 1870 there was a
race for control of the agricultural products of the interior. With new
industrial and technological developments, what were needed now were not
so much new markets as raw materials for industry. Greed then turned its
eye to lands that it had scarcely noticed before, and much foreign capital
was invested in railroads, harbors, and processing plants. These investments
were made with the consent and support of the ruling criollos, whose
holdings in land increased enormously in both size and value. Foreign and
national capital thus formed an alliance whose interests were best served by
the oligarchical governments that it usually supported. Given the power of
such an alliance, radical changes in social and political structures were rare.
    In Asia, the European Industrial Revolution had similar consequences,
although colonialism usually took its more traditional form of military
conquest and overt political domination. At first, the Western economic
powers remained content with opening new markets. But again and again
Western economic interests, feeling threatened by political developments in
the area, by the weakness of the local government, or by another industrial
power, forced their nations to intervene militarily and take over the
governments of the region—or at least to hold them with a firm grip. By the
middle of the twentieth century and into the twenty-first, however, there
would be a reaction against all of this, and after war in the Pacific and
revolution in China, nations such as Japan, China, India, and Korea would
emerge as political and economic powers.
    The colonization of black Africa, until then relatively slow, accelerated
in the last decades of the nineteenth century, when Europe burned with
imperialistic fever, and when what was sought was not new markets but
rather sources for raw materials. Many in Europe became convinced that in
order to be a power of the first order a nation had to rule an overseas
empire. By then Britain, France, and the Netherlands had such empires, and
now Belgium, Italy, and Germany joined in the mad scramble to claim
every corner of the world. Here again, there were nationalistic reactions in
the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, leading to a series of independent
nations.
    The colonial expansion of the nineteenth century was made possible
thanks to another consequence of modern industrial development: military
might. Western powers had weapons with which they could defeat even
vastly larger armies. Even such proud and populous nations as China and
Japan had to bow before what would otherwise have been second-rate
powers. Only a handful of nations in Africa and Asia were able to retain
their political independence, and even these were forced to surrender their
economic independence. China and Japan, for instance, although never
fully conquered by the Western powers, were literally forced to open trade
with the West. For the first time in history, the world became a vast
economic network.
    Behind this new order stood an even deeper intellectual revolution—one
that had begun with the Renaissance, but came to fruition in the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. Western civilization turned to observation and
experimentation as the primary means of gaining knowledge, and then
began applying such knowledge to the transformation of the world. The
first major application of this new form of knowledge was closely
connected with the Industrial Revolution, and with the energy it required.
For centuries, the main sources of energy had been water and wind. They
powered mills and moved ships. Now new forms of energy were developed.
The modern piston steam engine, first developed in the late sixteenth and
early seventeenth centuries, was now applied both to industrial production
and to transportation, on land as well as on sea—the first commercially
practical steamboat being built in 1802. Journeys that had previously taken
months were now reduced to weeks and even days. Then came the internal
combustion engine and its application to transportation, which led to the
automobile and the trucking industry, to the building of wider roads, to new
patterns of family life, to the colonization of the oil-rich lands of the Middle
East, and to a myriad changes in the entire process of industrial production
and marketing. The internal combustion engine, applied to aviation, made
the world even smaller than the steam engine and the railroad had. Now
journeys that had previously taken days could be completed in a matter of
hours. By the second half of the twentieth century it was apparent that new
forms and sources of energy had to be found and developed. Large
hydroelectric plants were built not only in the industrialized world, but also
in a number of poorer nations seeking to attain a level of development
similar to that in Western Europe and the United States. It seemed that the
world had become as small as it could ever be. Even the moon had been
reached, and there was talk of building cities in outer space. Nuclear power
had appeared on the scene, leading to debates between those who extolled
its efficiency and those who feared its dangers. While oil was still the most
commonly used source of energy, there were experiments and pilot projects
seeking to develop alternative sources of energy—wind, solar, geothermal,
and tidal.
    If the rapid development in transportation surprised those who lived in
the first half of the twentieth century, they were in for even bigger surprises
still to come. The world that seemed to have shrunk through new methods
of transportation was shrinking even faster through new methods of
communication. Samuel Morse invented the electric telegraph in 1837 and
by 1844 it had become a viable mode of communication; the first telephone
was demonstrated in 1877. By the 1950s, television had become a common
household feature in most of the industrialized world. People living in New
York in 1950 marveled that they could call an operator who could connect
them via telephone with someone in Cairo—sometimes in under an hour.
But by 2010 it was possible, not only to speak with someone in Cairo, but
also to send entire books and pictures in a matter of seconds. In 1975, the
use of computers was limited to a relatively small number of people
working mostly on technical matters. By 2010, pre-school children were
using computers, people were able to get in touch with virtually anyone
anywhere in the world instantly, and the Internet contained more
information—both true and false—than any library could ever hold.
   In a way, this was the culmination of developments that began in the
nineteenth century and even earlier. Throughout the nineteenth century,
Western civilization had considered itself destined to lead the world into an
age of happiness and abundance. The Industrial Revolution had created
wealth and comfort that two centuries earlier would have been considered
unattainable. In Asia, Africa, and Latin America, the native populations
appeared eager to absorb the ways and wisdom of industrial Europe and the
United States. The cause of missions prospered in spite of such setbacks as
the Boxer Rebellion in China (see Chapter 36), and there were hopes that in
the very near future most of the world’s population would be Christian. For
almost a century, with minor exceptions, the European powers had lived in
peace with each other.
   Destructive currents existed beneath the surface, however, and they
would eventually plunge the world into the most devastating war it had ever
known—a war to be followed by revolution, economic upheavals, and an
even more destructive conflagration. The relative peace of the nineteenth
century in Europe was possible in part because competition among
European powers took the form of colonial expansion. While Europe was at
peace, war by proxy overseas became a common feature of international
policies. By 1914, however, most of the territories of Asia, Africa, and
Latin America had been colonized—if not politically, at least economically.
Europe then turned its attention to its own southeastern region, the Balkans,
where the progressive breakup of the Turkish Empire had created a number
of states with unstable boundaries and governments. These lands became
the bone of contention among European powers, and it was out of that
contention that World War I would emerge. The very technological and
industrial progress of which the West boasted would then be seen in all of
its destructive power, for this war provided the occasion for the military use
of technology in submarine, aerial, and chemical warfare. The control that
the industrial powers had over distant lands meant that most of the planet
was directly or indirectly involved in the conflict. The war, which lasted
four years, involved thirty nations and a total armed force of sixty-five
million, of whom almost one-seventh died and more than one-third were
wounded in battle. The civilian casualties of the war, although more
difficult to assess, numbered at least as many as the military.
    Meanwhile, chaos in Russia had led to revolution. Russia was the one
great European power where the liberal ideas of the nineteenth century had
made practically no headway. Its autocratic government and landed
aristocracy continued ruling the nation as they had centuries earlier. Karl
Marx would never have expected Russia, where industrialization had been
slow, to become the first country where the revolution he announced would
succeed. His expectation was rather that the development of industry and
capital would eventually lead to a revolution of industrial workers, and that
peasants would not view such a revolution with sympathy. But the war
upset his predictions. In Russia, nationalist bitterness against a government
that appeared unable to win a battle was soon combined with protests in the
cities over lack of bread and in the countryside over lack of land. In March,
1917, Czar Nicholas II was forced to abdicate in favor of his brother, who
in turn abdicated a few days later. For a short time, the government was in
the hands of moderates who hoped for a liberal capitalist republic. But this
government’s failures in both war and economic policies, and the agitation
of V. I. Lenin and his Bolsheviks, lead to the November Revolution of
1917. Lenin immediately moved to set in motion his vast program of social
reorganization, nationalizing the land and all banks, and placing factories in
the hands of government-controlled trade unions. As part of this program,
all church property was also confiscated. Thus, the Russian Church, which
had considered itself the Third Rome after the fall of Byzantium, now found
itself living under conditions similar to those of the Byzantine church after
the Turkish invasion. The new government also withdrew from the war, but
soon found itself immersed in its own civil war against
counterrevolutionaries who had both international and ecclesiastical
support. By the time the Red Army had won the war, the Soviet government
was more convinced than ever that the church was its mortal enemy.
    In the Western hemisphere, the consequences of the World War I were
not as acutely felt. The United States did not enter the war until April 1917
and, although its armed forces suffered heavy casualties, other issues soon
demanded national attention. The nation turned inwards, seeking to solve its
own problems in isolation from the rest of the world and refusing to join the
League of Nations. Two issues with roots in the nineteenth century came to
occupy the center of the American stage: prohibition and women’s suffrage.
Prohibition of alcoholic beverages became the law of the land in 1919, less
than a year after the end of the war. Women’s right to vote was finally
granted by the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution, in 1920. The
1920s were a decade of economic prosperity, particularly for the wealthy
few (five percent of the population received one-third of all personal
income). Then came the Great Depression, which led to the election of
Franklin D. Roosevelt and to the New Deal. The recovery that took place
during Roosevelt’s presidency was seen as further proof that the nation was
basically sound, and that the Depression had been but a passing phase that
had been overcome through hard work and organization. Thus, the first half
of the twentieth century in the United States was not marked by the self-
doubt and pessimism that was beginning to sweep Europe.
    In the rest of the hemisphere, the most notable event was the Mexican
Revolution, a drawn-out affair, at times quite radical and at other times
fairly moderate, which began in 1910 and went on for decades. Here again,
there were constant conflicts between the Catholic Church and the
revolution. In 1927, as earlier in Russia, church properties were confiscated.
Eventually, without returning the confiscated property, the state relented in
its most stringent policies against the church.
    In Europe, it was hoped that the League of Nations would be able to
prevent a repetition of the tragic events of World War I, but the growth of
Fascism rendered such hopes futile. Fascism, which first gained prominence
in Italy under the leadership of Benito Mussolini, exploited wounded
national pride in order to glorify war and to turn the entire nation into a
totalitarian military machine. Its social doctrines were confused; at first it
sided with radical revolutionaries, but eventually it exploited the fear of
Communism and joined forces with industrialists in order to create a new
aristocracy of power and production. In any case, the dream of national
grandeur, and hatred of democracy and political liberalism as the creation of
an effeminate bourgeoisie, were characteristic of Fascism in all its stages.
As Mussolini put it, “What maternity is to women, that is war to man.”
Soon the movement spread to other countries. Its German counterpart, the
Nazi party, came to power in 1933, and eventually overshadowed Italian
Fascism. Through Nazi influence, anti-Semitism became part of the
established dogma of international Fascism—and led to the death of
millions of Jews in Germany and elsewhere. By 1936, Fascism had attained
at least a measure of power, not only in Italy and Germany, but also in
Japan, Poland, Austria, Hungary, Greece, Rumania, and Bulgaria. In 1939,
with the victory of Spanish dictator Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil
War, it became firmly established in Spain. Fascist attitudes toward
Christianity varied. In Spain, Franco considered the Catholic Church one of
his closest allies, and always declared himself its faithful son. Mussolini’s
attitudes wavered according to various circumstances. Hitler felt that
Christianity, with its teachings of universal love and turning the other
cheek, was antagonistic to his ultimate goals of conquest and domination—
but he sought to use the church to support those goals.
    Part of the allure of Fascism was in reviving dreams of ancient glories.
Mussolini promised to restore the Roman Empire. Greek Fascists spoke of a
rebirth of Spartan militarism and Byzantine power. Spanish falangistas
sought a return to the golden century of the Spanish Empire. Obviously,
these various dreams were mutually contradictory. But what stood behind
them—the glorification of war, dread of the free exchange of ideas, a
totalitarian nationalism, and opposition to all forms of egalitarianism—
united the various Fascist movements in opposition to all that sounded like
democracy, liberalism, or pacifism. Italy and Germany joined forces in an
Axis to which Japan was later added. Through a Soviet-German agreement,
Russian neutrality was assured. A month later, in September 1939, Europe
was at war.
    Once again, for the second time in three decades, the entire world was
swept into the conflict. At first, the Fascist powers—the Axis—ensured that
Russia stayed out of the conflict. In fact, Russia took advantage of its
friendly relations with the Axis to split Poland with Germany in a partition
agreement and to extend its holdings in the Baltic. Soon most of Western
Europe was in the hands of the Fascists, while their Japanese allies
extended their holdings in the Orient. By 1941, with the German invasion
of Russia and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, no major power was
allowed to remain neutral. Since the Axis had conquered most of Europe,
the main fronts of battle were now the Pacific, North Africa, the Russian-
German line, and the English Channel. But battles were also being waged in
African colonies, in the Near East, and as far as the Río de la Plata (today
Uruguay and Argentina). The names of Pacific islands until then unknown
in the West became household words. Tribal peoples who lived in relative
isolation from the rest of the world now saw their skies crisscrossed by
military aircraft, and their lands disputed by nations until then unknown to
them. In all, fifty-seven nations declared war, defending one side or the
other.
    By the time the smoke cleared and losses were calculated, it was clear
that the cost of the war had been enormous. In the most belligerent nations,
the number of military dead and missing was devastatingly high: one out of
every four hundred and fifty people in the United States, one out of every
one hundred and fifty in the United Kingdom and in Italy, one out of every
two hundred in France and in China, one out of every twenty-two in the
Soviet Union, one of every twenty-five for Germany, and one out of every
forty-six people in Japan. The total number of military personnel killed or
missing was more than fifteen million. To this must be added the larger
number of direct civilian casualties, the millions of Jews killed by the Nazis
and their allies, and the incalculable number of those who died of famine or
disease as an indirect result of the war.
    An uncounted casualty of the war was the optimistic view of the future
of Western civilization that had prevailed during the nineteenth century.
This was the civilization that, through an enlightened combination of
Christian values and technical expertise, had been expected to bring about a
new age for humankind. This was the civilization that it was the white
man’s burden to share with less fortunate people. And now, through the two
most devastating wars the world had ever seen, this civilization had spread
death and destruction throughout the world. Its technological prowess had
been used to invent destructive machines that could not have been imagined
a generation earlier, culminating in the explosion of the first atomic weapon
at Hiroshima on August 6, 1945. Germany, once the epitome of European
civilization, the nation that boasted of its intellectual leadership of the
Western world, had fallen prey to a demonic fanaticism theretofore
unknown among the most primitive tribes of the world.
    A direct consequence of all this was a worldwide revolt against
colonialism in all its forms. First, the colonial empires of the defeated
nations were dismantled. But it soon became clear that even the victors had
lost a great deal of prestige as a result of the war. Nationalist movements
that had begun decades earlier suddenly took on new life, and in a span of
two decades every colonial empire was dismembered. Political
independence did not always lead to economic independence, for in many
cases an economic neocolonial system of economic exploitation was
developed to take the place of the old order. But twenty years after the end
of the war, it was clear that there were strong movements against economic
imperialism in the poorer nations. At times, nationalism took the form of a
resurgence of ancient non-Christian religions. Some movements sought to
change not only the international economic order, but also the social order
of the nation itself, often following a socialist model. The first and largest
example of this trend was China, where, partly as a result of the war, the
Nationalist government was overthrown by the Communists. Although for
some time China was faithful to Russian Communism, it eventually drifted
away from links that still smacked of the older tutelage of the European
nations over the rest of the world, and would eventually develop what
amounted to its own form of capitalism. Japan followed the opposite tack:
committing itself to capitalism and industrialization, it sought to compete
with the older industrial nations of Europe and North America. Almost all
of Africa and the Muslim world became independent of Western political
rule. In the Muslim world, where traditional ways were often threatened by
influences from abroad, radical, and violent forms of Islam came to the
foreground, and by the twenty-first century these were causing grave
concern not only among Western nations, but also in the Muslim world
itself. Israel, seen by many as a Western enclave in a non-Western area, was
hard pressed by its neighbors, who felt that this new state had been created
at their expense. Regimes of white supremacy in Rhodesia and in South
Africa collapsed. Many in the new nations all over the world, as well as in
the older nations of Latin America, felt that the central agenda for the
twenty-first century was the construction of an economic order less
unfavorable to the poorer nations, the restructuring of foreign relations on
that basis, and the redistribution of wealth within their own boundaries.
    In the midst of all these changes, the industrialized nations of Europe, as
well as the United States, often found themselves at a loss. Many in those
countries had been taught that the entire colonial and neocolonial enterprise
was the result of altruistic motivations and high ideals. From that
perspective, the anticolonial reaction was nothing short of bewildering. It
could only be explained by the presence of an evil conspiracy leading the
so-called natives astray, away from their own best interests. This
understanding of the anticolonial movement was encouraged by the
mentality of the Cold War—the name given to the ongoing but bloodless
conflict between capitalist and Communist nations that began immediately
after World War II and continued with different degrees of intensity for
several decades. As a result of World War II, the Soviet Union ruled most of
Eastern Europe, and Germany was divided between the Federal Republic—
West Germany—and the Democratic Republic—East Germany. This region
of the world was the scene for much of the activity of the Cold War,
including the blockade of Berlin by the Communists, and the building of a
wall to prevent citizens of East Berlin from defecting to the West. In some
areas, such as in Korea and Vietnam, the Cold War erupted into open
hostilities—although the major powers, fearful of each other’s nuclear
capabilities, avoided direct military confrontation. Many in the West
interpreted the entire anticolonial movement in terms of the Cold War.
Since Communists were indeed at work in many revolutionary movements
—although not always leading them—it was possible to see the entire
anticolonial trend as a vast Communist conspiracy. This interpretation,
more popular in the United States than in Europe, had the advantage of
explaining how the altruism of the white man’s burden had led to the
virulent anticolonialism of the late twentieth century. But this easy
explanation was achieved at the expense of a gross and dangerous
oversimplification—one that threatened to alienate the West from the vast
majority of humankind, for it saw Communist conspiracies in every
struggle for justice and freedom. From the point of view of the Cold War,
the great struggle was between East and West—between capitalism and
communism.
    The last decade of the twentieth century brought about the unexpected
fall of communism in Eastern Europe and the dismemberment of the Soviet
Empire, at which point it became clear that the struggle was not so much
between East and West as between North and South, between rich and poor,
between developed and underdeveloped. The breakdown of repressive
regimes often led to the breakdown of countries until then held together by
those regimes. Not only the Soviet Empire, but also Czechoslovakia,
Yugoslavia, and others soon divided along ethnic, cultural, and religious
lines, in several cases leading to war and even genocide.
    Important changes were also taking place in the West. Since industrial
production and communications technology were often cheaper in the
poorer countries, many industrial plants and jobs moved to those countries,
thus creating a sense of betrayal among many industrial laborers who
witnessed their livelihood being exported. But at the same time that this was
the impression in the industrialized nations, wealth was still flowing from
the former colonies to their former metropolises, and people from colonial
and neocolonial areas were moving to those metropolises in search of better
lives, resulting in vast numbers of African, Asian, and Caribbean
immigrating to Great Britain; Latin Americans to the United States;
Africans and Arabs to countries throughout Western Europe; and
Indonesians to the Netherlands. Thus, one could say that the earlier
expectation that the entire world would be Westernized had to be corrected
by the reality that those who had previously been Westernized were now
exerting their influence on the West, and changing it in unexpected ways—
from language to diet, and from family life to religion.
    Another revolutionary change was also sweeping through the world late
in the twentieth century and early in the twenty-first. People who until
recently had seemed content to play a secondary role—particularly blacks
and other minorities in white-dominated lands, and women everywhere—
suddenly began claiming a share in the process whereby decisions were
made. In Latin America, there was a strong reaffirmation of ancient
Amerindian culture, often with political connotations. This was not entirely
unrelated to the tragedy of two world wars and the clear threat of a third.
Indeed, if those in leadership had plunged the world into such debacles, it
seemed high time that others be given an opportunity at leadership. During
World War II, blacks and women in the United States, and women in Great
Britain, had been called to give their best for their country. After the war,
they proved unwilling to return to their previous status. Both the civil rights
movement and the feminist movement were at the same time an attempt to
gain greater power for blacks and women, and a criticism of the manner in
which white males were running the world.
    In all of these situations, the church was present. More than any
international organization, corporation, or political movement, the church
cut across national boundaries, class distinctions, and political allegiances.
Indeed, the great legacy of the nineteenth century was that, for the first time
in history, a truly universal church had been born. Although some in the
twentieth century would see the missionaries of earlier generations as
unrealistic dreamers, the truth is that they succeeded, for after their passing
they left behind a vast network of Christians of every culture, color, and
nationality. To such an international church, the issues of the twenty-first
century were not simple. Especially in the poorer countries of the world,
there were many who were convinced that their Christian faith required that
they be involved in liberating the people from economic and social
oppression; there were also many who insisted that this was not the task of
the church. Threatened by the difficulty and complexity of the times, many
turned to fundamentalism. Quite often such fundamentalism was allied to
political and economic conservatism, particularly in the former colonial and
neocolonial centers. But there were also many—again, primarily in the
poorer regions of the world—for whom Christianity became a means of
individual and communal survival, promoting food production and
distribution, education, health, and land reform, sometimes in fairly radical
ways. All this took place in a context in which war and racial and class
strife divided the church—often along lines that had little to do with earlier
theological differences. At times it was persecuted; at other times it was
used by people with ulterior motives. Amid the perplexities of the time, its
members were often divided, bewildered, and even fearful. And yet,
through war, persecution, and civil strife, they sought to give witness to the
One whose rule of peace and justice shall have no end.
    In the West, the church lost much of the political power and cultural
prestige it had once held. This was seen in a series of revolutions that
marked the end of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the
nineteenth century, first in what would become the United States (see
Chapter 27), then in France (see Chapter 28), and finally in Latin America
(see Chapter 29). These revolutions—and the Russian Revolution in 1917
(see Chapter 35) —made it possible to speak of the post-Constantinian era,
a time when the church no longer had the support of the state and its
institutions. And this loss of power and prestige would go far beyond
political matters, extending also to the cultural and the social. By the
beginning of the twenty-first century, it was clear that the impact of the
church and its teaching on the daily life of Western Europeans and North
Americans was waning. Not only was attendance at church services
declining, Christianity was virtually absent or ignored by most forms of
mass media and in much of social and family life. Although the main factor
contributing to this decline was secularism, there were also throughout the
world—but particularly in the West—many people who sought in ancient
religions and practices a spiritual solace that they felt the organized church
could not give them. There was a revival of Gnosticism, which the church
had thought a matter of the distant past. Others turned to astrology, or to
spiritism, or to magic practices; and many would simply gather bits from a
variety of sources, and construct their own personalized religion.




     Even high in the Andes Mountains, one finds indications of the interest in the occult that
                         characterizes much of the twenty-first century.

   The intellectual challenges were no less daunting. Modernity had
drastically changed the world view of most people in traditional
Christendom. Ancient authorities—including the Bible—were questioned
as never before. New democratic ideals conflicted with the hierarchical
structure of some churches—particularly the Roman Catholic Church.
Darwin and his theory of evolution became a symbol of the intellectual and
doctrinal challenges of the time. How were Christians to respond to these
and other challenges of modernity? As we shall see, on this score Roman
Catholicism (see Chapter 31) followed a path diametrically opposed to that
of most Protestant theology (see Chapter 30)—with the immediate
consequence that the rift between these two branches of Western
Christianity widened in the nineteenth century more than ever before. But
here again the twentieth and twenty-first centuries were also marked by
unexpected developments. The failures of modernity were such that people
began speaking of a post-modern period. In the field of theology, there was
a pendulum swing in which both Protestant and Catholic theologians moved
away from their former extremes—Protestants becoming generally more
skeptical about the achievements and promise of modernity, and Catholics
acknowledging some of its values and contributions. But all now had to
deal with a new intellectual order in which many of the axioms of
modernity were being questioned.
    While all of this was occupying the attention of most theologians and
church leaders, other momentous changes were taking place in the life of
the church. It is to these events that the title of this final part of our story
refers: Beyond Christendom. In this context, Christendom is understood in
both spatial and political terms. Until this time, and for much of the history
of Christianity, there were regions of the world that considered themselves
Christian, as distinct from others that did not, and in these areas the church
in its various expressions generally held significant political and social
power. (Since this has happened at various times and places, some prefer to
speak of Christendoms, in the plural.) But the word beyond also has two
meanings in the title of this section, both equally important if we are to
understand the state of Christianity in the early decades of the twenty-first
century. First of all, beyond has a spatial meaning. It is used here to indicate
that the most momentous events taking place in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries were probably not the theological debates in Western
Europe that have traditionally occupied much of our attention. Nor were
they the edicts of the Roman Church opposing the evils of modernity. They
were not even the political and social revolutions that took place in Europe
and North America. While all of these are important and must be given due
consideration, from the perspective of the twenty-first century it would
appear that the most important event in the history of Christianity in the
nineteenth and twentieth century was that it moved beyond its traditional
confines within Western civilization and became a truly universal faith. As
we shall see (in Chapter 36) this was originally connected with the colonial
expansion of the West. But when the tide of that expansion began to ebb, in
many of the former colonial lands Christianity continued to grow, to put
down roots, and to find new forms and expressions better adapted to the
cultural and social landscape of each region. Thus, during the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries Christianity moved beyond Christendom in
the spatial sense.
    But the result of all this is that we can now speak of Christianity moving
beyond Christendom also in a temporal sense. In the twenty-first century, it
is clear that the time of Christendom has passed. It has passed in the West,
with the end of the Constantinian fusion between church and state, and
between Christian faith and cultural and social practices. But it has also
passed in the sense that we have entered a new period of history in which
the North Atlantic is no longer the center of Christian vitality and creativity.
    Statistics confirm this. In 1900, 94.5 percent of Europeans and 96.6
percent of North Americans were Christian; by 2000, those numbers had
declined to 76.8 percent and 84.2 percent respectively. In Africa, 9.2
percent of the population was Christian in 1900, and by 2000 the figure was
45.9 percent. In Asia, the most populous region in the world and the seat of
several world religions, there was a Christian population of 2.3 percent in
1900, and of 8.5 percent in 2000.12 Thus, numeric decline in the old centers
of Christendom was more than balanced by explosive growth in areas
where a hundred years earlier the presence of Christianity was minimal.
    It is to these sometimes frightening, but certainly exhilarating,
developments that we must now turn.
                                    27

 A Shifting Landscape: The United States


   The God who gave us life gave us liberty at the same time; the hand
   of force may destroy, but cannot disjoin them.


THOMAS JEFFERSON
       THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE THIRTEEN COLONIES
Since their foundation, the British colonies in North America had enjoyed a
measure of autonomy. This was aided by the political and religious
convulsions that shook England during the seventeenth century, making it
more difficult for the British government to exercise authority overseas.
Given these circumstances, many of the colonies had organized their
government and their trade as best suited them, and not as best suited the
interests of England. In the second half of the eighteenth century, however,
the British government began seeking more direct rule in the colonies, and
the latter reacted vigorously against this encroachment by royal authorities.
Three main factors precipitated the open conflict. First, the British
quartered seventeen regiments in the colonies. Since their defense did not
require such military strength, the colonials viewed the army as an
instrument of repression. Second, taxes were a constant point of friction.
The crown decided that the colonies should pay the expenses of their
governance—including the cost of keeping the much-resented regiments on
the field—and to that end levied a series of taxes. In England there was a
principle of long standing that the levy of taxes needed to be approved by a
representative assembly.The colonials felt that they possessed the same
right and that this right was being violated. Third, there were conflicts over
Indian lands. For both political and moral reasons, British authorities
decreed that there would be no more white occupation of areas beyond the
Appalachian Mountains. This law was unpopular in the colonies, where
poor whites hoped to establish a homestead in lands now forbidden, and
speculators of the landed aristocracy had formed companies with the
express objective of colonizing Indian lands.
    For these reasons, tension grew between the colonies and the metropolis.
Stricter laws evoked greater defiance. In 1770, British troops fired on a
crowd in Boston, and five people were killed. Faced with the threat of these
troops—now considered foreign—the colonial militia became more active
and built up its arsenals. In 1775, when British forces threatened to destroy
one of those arsenals, the militia offered resistance, and thus began the
American War of Independence. On July 4, 1776, more than a year later,
delegates from each of the thirteen colonies, calling themselves the
Continental Congress, gathered in Philadelphia to proclaim their
independence from Britain. France and Spain then became allies of the new
nation, while England counted on the support of many Indian tribes who
feared that the independence of the colonies would result in their own
destruction—as did indeed happen. Finally, in 1782, a provisional
agreement was reached, confirmed a year later by the Treaty of Paris.
    These events profoundly affected North American religion. Many
combined the struggle for independence with a rationalist ideology that
spoke of Providence above all as a principle of progress. The new nation
itself was living proof of human progress. Part of such progress was leaving
behind the dogmatic attitude of traditional Christianity, and espousing only
natural religion, or, at best, essential Christianity. The traditional teachings
and practice of Christian churches, except what could be understood in
terms of natural reason or common morality, were considered relics of a
bygone age, unnecessary ballast on the ship of progress.
    Such ideas became institutionalized in two originally independent
movements that were soon entwined: Unitarianism and Universalism. The
first was practically contemporary with independence, and made headway
mostly in Anglican and Congregationalist circles that were no longer
willing to subscribe to traditional orthodoxy. Although the churches that
resulted from this movement were called Unitarian because they rejected
the doctrine of the Trinity, in truth they disagreed with orthodoxy on many
other points. They were rationalists, stressing human freedom and
intellectual capabilities in contrast to the orthodox emphasis on divine
mystery and human sin. This movement became most influential among the
merchant class in New England. Universalism—that is, the doctrine that in
the end all will be saved—was introduced in the colonies by British
Methodists shortly before the push for independence. These Methodists
argued that the doctrine of eternal damnation was a denial of God’s love.
Some Universalist churches were organized in New England after
independence. Soon the movement merged with the Unitarians. It was also
in these circles that Transcendentalism found most of its adherents. This
movement, whose most famous representative was Ralph Waldo Emerson
(1803–1882), combined rationalism with Romanticism. It stressed self-
knowledge as a means to understand the universe and its purpose, and held
that there is a bit of the divine in every human being—what some called the
Oversoul. Like Unitarianism, Transcendentalism gained most of its adepts
from among the higher classes, although many of its ideas eventually
infiltrated the rest of the nation.
                             The United States (1800)

    In any case, the most immediate challenge facing the churches in the
new nation was the question of their relations with Great Britain. As was to
be expected, this issue was most grave for Anglicanism. Since long before
independence, many had looked upon bishops as agents of the crown, and
had therefore opposed the naming of bishops for the colonies. During the
struggle for independence, a high proportion of loyalists were among the
members of the Church of England, and eventually many of these
emigrated to England, the Caribbean, or Canada. Finally, in 1783, those
Anglicans who remained in the United States formed the Protestant
Episcopal Church, which was strongest among the aristocracy.
    At first, Methodism suffered similar reverses, for the same reasons.
Wesley was a staunch supporter of the crown, and called on colonial
Methodists to obey the royal edicts. He also criticized the rebellious
colonists for claiming freedom for themselves at the same time that they
denied it to their slaves. After the Declaration of Independence, all English
Methodist preachers in the colonies, except Asbury, returned to Great
Britain. This did not contribute to Methodist popularity among the patriots.
But, thanks to the untiring efforts of Asbury, American Methodism began
taking its distinct shape, and new preachers were recruited. Finally, in 1784,
at the Christmas Conference, American Methodism was organized as a
church, apart from both Anglicanism and from British Methodism. It was
also decided that American Methodism would be led by bishops.
   Other churches followed different courses. The Baptist Church grew
rapidly, particularly in Virginia and other southern colonies, and from there
penetrated the new territories of Tennessee and Kentucky. The
Congregationalists, in spite of having gained prestige by their support of
independence, made significant gains in membership only in the areas
colonized from New England. In general, all denominations spent their best
efforts in reorganizing themselves in view of the new situation, and in
repairing the damage done by war.
   In fact, the very word denomination points to one of the main
characteristics of the Protestant Christianity resulting from the North
American experience. The word itself indicates that the various churches
are seen as denominations, that is, as different names given to Christians. In
a religiously pluralistic society where tolerance was necessary for political
survival, and in view of the bloodshed that dogmatism had caused
elsewhere, North American Protestants tended to think of the church as an
invisible reality consisting of all true believers, and of the visible churches
or denominations as voluntary organizations that believers create and join
according to their convictions and preferences.
   A practical consequence of this distinction between the church and the
denominations is that the great debates that have divided North American
Protestantism have not been confined to a particular church, but have
crossed denominational barriers. Thus, for instance, questions such as
slavery, evolution, fundamentalism, liberalism, and racial policies have
simultaneously divided several denominations, and the partisans of one
position or another have joined across denominational lines.
   The Disciples of Christ were born as a response to the
denominationalism of American Christianity. The founders of this
movement, Thomas Campbell (1763–1854) and his son Alexander (1788–
1866), had no desire to found a new church or denomination. Their purpose
was to call all Protestant Christians to unity through the proclamation of the
gospel in its original purity. Alexander Campbell, who soon became the
leader of the movement, combined some of the rationalism common to his
age with a profound respect for the authority of the New Testament.
Therefore, much of his interpretation of the New Testament was influenced
by rationalist views, although his zeal in obeying what he took to be God’s
commands was unparalleled by the rationalists. With the firm conviction
that Christian unity could be achieved by a common return to primitive
Christianity as he understood it, Campbell launched a program of
reformation that eventually (though much against his original designs) led
to the formation of a new denomination, the Christian Church (or Disciples
of Christ). Given the tensions in Campbell’s own vision, as well as in
various later influences, throughout their history the Disciples have
included both a rationalist and a conservative wing. But all have been
characterized by their interest in Christian unity.

                          EARLY IMMIGRATION
The thirteen colonies that later became the United States had been peopled
by immigrants, mostly from Great Britain, but also from Germany and other
parts of Europe. But late in the eighteenth century, and throughout the
nineteenth, there were unprecedented waves of migration from Europe to
the United States. This was due partly to conditions in Europe—the
Napoleonic Wars, social upheaval caused by industrialization, the tyranny
of various regimes, famine, and so forth—and partly to the vast expanse of
land seemingly available in the West of the new nation. At the same time,
the slave traffic also brought to the United States vast numbers of unwilling
immigrants.
    Such massive immigration had far-reaching consequences for the shape
of Christianity in the United States. By the middle of the nineteenth century,
the Catholic Church (which at the time of independence was a small
minority) had become the largest religious body in the nation. At first, most
Catholics were of English descent. Later came French and Germans. But
around 1846 a great famine began in Ireland that lasted several decades, and
soon Irish immigrants and their descendants made up the largest contingent
of American Catholics. This created tensions within the Catholic Church,
both locally and nationally. At the parish level, each group of immigrants
saw the church as a means to preserve its culture and tradition; therefore,
each wanted a separate parish. At the national level, there were power
struggles between various groups, each wishing to be governed by a
hierarchy that understood and represented it. Such tensions would continue
well into the twentieth century, and would become more complex as other
groups were added to North American Catholicism—Italians, Poles, and
others by immigration; the French of Louisiana by purchase (1803); and the
Hispanics of Mexico (1848); and Puerto Rico (1898) first by military
conquest and then by immigration. Eventually, Catholicism in the United
States would be characterized by its cultural diversity and by the degree to
which that diversity and the pressure of the surrounding culture questioned
and limited the traditional power of the hierarchy.
    The growth of Catholicism provoked a strong reaction on the part of
some Protestants. In the very early years of the new nation, there was
already opposition to unlimited Catholic immigration, on the grounds that
democracy was not compatible with the hierarchical understanding of
authority of Roman Catholics, and that their growing numbers were
therefore a threat to the nation. Later, the Ku Klux Klan would unleash its
xenophobic fanaticism, not only against blacks, but also against Catholics
and Jews, on the premise that the United States was called to be a white,
Protestant, and democratic nation, and that these three characteristics were
inseparable. When, in 1864, Pope Pius IX condemned a list of eighty
“errors” that included several of the fundamental theses of American
democracy, there were many in the United States, both conservative and
liberal, who saw this as a confirmation of their worst fears regarding the
political goals of the Catholic Church (see Chapter 32). It would take
almost another century for the nation to be willing to trust its highest
political offices to Roman Catholics.
    Lutheranism also grew rapidly through immigration. At first, most
Lutheran immigrants were German, but later there were also many
Scandinavians. Each of these groups brought with it its own traditions, and
for a long time the main goal of American Lutheranism was the eventual
union of the various Lutheran bodies. Other religious groups that grew
through immigration were the Mennonites, Moravians, Greek and Russian
Orthodox, and Jews. The rich variety of such groups further necessitated the
tradition of religious tolerance that had begun centuries earlier in Rhode
Island and Pennsylvania.
    Many immigrants also brought with them the ideal of life in a religious
community governed by gospel principles and distinct—sometimes even
withdrawn—from the rest of society. Thus the American countryside was
dotted with small experiments in communal living. From very early times,
one of the goals leading Europeans to the colonies of North America was
the founding of a new society in a new land. The Mayflower Pilgrims were
only the first of thousands with similar dreams. Both European immigrants
and natives of the United States moved west, seeking places to found ideal
communities. The Moravians founded settlements in Pennsylvania that still
exist today, and similar experiments were undertaken by Mennonites and
other Anabaptists in search of a place where they could freely practice their
pacifist beliefs. German Pietists founded the community of Ephrata, also in
Pennsylvania, and several others nearby and in Ohio. The commonality of
goods was a characteristic of many of these settlements. In 1846, the
Oneida community went so far as to practice complex matrimony, an
arrangement in which all adults were married to all others of the opposite
sex.
    One of the most remarkable of these movements was that of the Shakers,
led by Ann Lee Stanley—Mother Ann Lee. For a time they sought to live
out their faith in their native England, but social pressure was such that they
eventually decided to emigrate to America. In their new homeland,
probably in imitation of neighboring groups, they opted for communal
living. Mother Ann Lee claimed that she was the Second Coming of Christ
(hence the official name of the Shaker church: The United Society of
Believers in Christ’s Second Appearing), who had now appeared in
feminine form as he had appeared earlier in masculine form. Eventually, all
would be saved, and the present community of belief was only the
beachhead of that final salvation. Meanwhile, believers must abstain from
sex, which is the root of all evil. One of the characteristics of Shaker
worship was the important role played by dance. For a few decades, the
movement flourished, and several Shaker communities were founded. As
experiments in communal living, they were quite successful, for conditions
in Shaker communities were usually better than in neighboring areas. But
eventually the movement dwindled, lacking in both converts and in new
generations and today there are only a few surviving members.

                 THE SECOND GREAT AWAKENING
Toward the end of the eighteenth century, a Second Great Awakening began
in New England. At first, it did not include great emotional outbursts, but
was marked rather by a sudden earnestness in Christian devotion and living.
Attendance at worship increased markedly, and many spoke of having had
an experience of conversion. Nor did this awakening have at first the anti-
intellectual overtones of other similar movements. On the contrary, it made
headway among some of the most distinguished theologians of New
England. One of its foremost advocates was Timothy Dwight, president of
Yale University and a grandson of Jonathan Edwards.
    That first phase of the awakening resulted in the founding of several
societies whose purpose was to make the gospel known. Most important
among these were the American Bible Society, founded in 1816, and the
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, founded six years
earlier. The latter was the result of a covenant made by a group of students
meeting on a haystack, who vowed to devote themselves to foreign
missions. When Adoniram Judson, one of the first missionaries sent by the
American Board, became a Baptist, many Baptists in the United States set
aside some of their extreme congregationalism in order to organize a
General Convention the purpose of which was to support Baptist
missionaries throughout the world. In local churches, women’s missionary
societies appeared, and some of these would later develop into various
feminine organizations. Other societies born during the Second Awakening
took up various social causes, such as the abolition of slavery—the
American Colonization Society, to which we shall return—and the war
against alcohol—the American Society for the Promotion of Temperance,
founded in 1826. Women became leaders in the latter cause, to the extent
that, in the second half of the century, under the leadership of Frances
Willard, the Women’s Christian Temperance Union became the foremost
defender of women’s rights. Thus, some of the roots of American feminism
can be traced to the Second Great Awakening.
    Meanwhile, the awakening had moved beyond the limits of New
England and of the educated elite, and had made great headway among
people of less education and lesser means. Many of these people were
moving west, for one of the results of the War of Independence was that the
European powers agreed to the expansion of the United States as far as the
Mississippi River. Many of those who traveled west carried with them the
vibrant faith kindled by the Second Awakening. But, since conditions on the
frontier were different, the awakening now became more emotional and less
intellectual, to the point that it eventually became anti-intellectual.
    The Cane Ridge Revival of 1801, in Cane Ridge, Kentucky, marked a
significant step in that process. It was originally organized by the local
Presbyterian pastor, who announced a great assembly or camp meeting for
the promotion of a deeper faith. Being in an area where there were few
opportunities to gather and celebrate, the pastor’s announcement had a
resounding success. On the appointed date, thousands gathered. Many went
to Cane Ridge for religious reasons. Others took the opportunity to gamble
and carouse. Besides the pastor who had issued the original invitation, there
were also several Baptist and Methodist preachers in attendance. While
some played and others drank, the pastors preached. A critic of the
awakening later declared that at Cane Ridge as many souls were conceived
as were saved. In any case, the response to the call to repentance was
surprising and overwhelming. While some wept and others laughed
uncontrollably, still others trembled, some ran about, and some even
barked. The meeting lasted a week, and since then many were convinced
that such gatherings were the best way to proclaim the gospel. After that
time, when the words evangelism and revival were used, they evoked
images of Cane Ridge.
    Although the gathering at Cane Ridge had been organized by a
Presbyterian, that denomination did not favor the unbridled emotional
response that was becoming part of the movement. Soon Presbyterians
began taking action against ministers who participated in events such as
Cane Ridge. But Methodists and Baptists took up the idea of celebrating
camp meetings, and these eventually developed into periodic revivals. Since
such revivals became an important part of social life on the frontier, both
Methodist and Baptist groups achieved rapid growth. Another reason for
their growth was that they were willing to present the message as simply as
possible, and to use preachers with little or no education. While other
denominations lacked personnel because they had no facilities within which
to educate them on the frontier, Methodists and Baptists were willing to use
whomever felt called by the Lord. The Methodist vanguard were lay
preachers, many of them serving an entire area they called a circuit, always
under the supervision of the connection and its bishops. The Baptists made
use of farmers or others who made a living from their trade, and who also
served as pastors of the local church. When a new area was opened for
settlement, there usually was among the settlers a devout Baptist willing to
take up the ministry of preaching. Thus, both Methodists and Baptists were
strongly represented in the new territories, and by the middle of the century
they were the largest Protestant denominations in the country.
    Another important consequence of the Second Great Awakening was
that it helped break down the strict correspondence between ethnic origin
and religious affiliation. Among the new Baptists and Methodists there
were German ex-Lutherans, Scottish ex-Presbyterians, and Irish ex-
Catholics. Although it was still generally true that denominational
allegiance coincided with ethnic origin, after the Second Great Awakening,
and especially on the frontier, such correspondence could no longer be
taken for granted.




  During the Second Great Awakening, camp meetings such as this Methodist one were typical of
                               frontier American Christianity.

       MANIFEST DESTINY AND THE WAR WITH MEXICO
Since the first landing of the Mayflower Pilgrims, the notion that the British
colonies in the New World had been founded with divine assistance, in
order to fulfill a providential mission, was commonly accepted. Leaders in
the struggle for independence spoke of a new experiment that would lead
humankind along paths of progress and liberty. Later immigrants regarded
the United States as a veritable promised land of freedom and abundance.
Such ideas often went hand in hand with the conviction that Protestantism
was superior to Catholicism, and that the latter was a hindrance to both
freedom and progress. Very early on, England felt that its colonies were
threatened by Spanish Catholics from the south, and by French Catholics
from the north; therefore, such colonies were seen as a Protestant bulwark
in the New World. All this was linked to a racist attitude; European
immigrants often took for granted that whites were superior, and were
therefore justified in taking lands away from Indians and freedom away
from blacks.
    In 1823, President James Monroe proclaimed his famous doctrine, that
the United States would not countenance new European ventures in the
Western hemisphere, and the destiny of the new nation seemed particularly
manifest in connection with that hemisphere. At about the same time,
Mexico’s ambassador to the United States noted that many people with
whom he spoke in his host country were convinced that the eventual result
of the wars of independence in Spanish America would be that most of the
continent would belong to the United States. When coined in 1845, the
phrase Manifest Destiny referred specifically to U.S. expansion continuing
west all the way to the Pacific by means of occupying Oregon—the
possession of which was currently disputed by Great Britain—and by
occupying all Mexican land that lay directly west of what was then the U.S.
border. Once negotiations resolved the Oregon question, the matter of
Mexico’s territory standing between the United States and the Pacific
remained to be settled.
    American expansionism had previously played an important role in
Texas. That area, a neglected part of the Mexican state of Coahuila, was
invaded in 1819 by James Long, an adventurer who was defeated by the
Mexican army. In order to dissuade others from similar adventures, Mexico
began allowing people from the United States to settle in Texas, as long as
they were Catholic and they swore allegiance to Mexico. The net result was
a wave of immigration by people who were willing to deny their religion in
order to become landowners and who, while nominally Mexican, believed
that their race made them naturally superior to the mestizos (people of
mixed Indian and European blood) who governed the area in the name of
Mexico. One of these immigrants, Stephen Austin, would later declare: “for
fifteen years, I have been laboring like a slave to Americanize Texas.” He
would add that his enemies were “a population of Indians, Mexicans and
renegades, all mixed together, and all the natural enemies of white men and
civilization.”13
    The question of slavery made matters more difficult. Mexico abolished
slavery in 1829, and immigrants to Texas (who often depended on slavery
for their wealth) responded by conspiring to secede from Mexico to join the
United States. Such conspiracies were aided by those in the United States
who had begun to fear the abolitionist movement, and who saw Texas as a
possible ally. Others who supported the movement hoped to become rich by
speculating on lands Mexicans would be forced to abandon. At one point,
the U.S. ambassador to Mexico tried to bribe a Mexican official by offering
him two hundred thousand dollars in exchange for his support for a
proposed purchase of Texas.
    Finally, war broke out. The Mexican army had far greater numbers, but
the Texan rebels—both immigrants from the United States and discontented
Mexicans—were better armed, and possessed more artillery as well as rifles
with three times the range of Mexican muskets. At the mission of El Alamo,
in San Antonio, some two hundred rebels resisted an entire Mexican army.
After fierce struggle, the last survivors surrendered, and were executed by
the Mexicans. “Remember the Alamo” then became the battle cry of the
rebels, used in the United States to raise funds and recruit volunteers. The
rebels were repeatedly defeated by the larger Mexican army; but, in 1836,
Sam Houston took the Mexican headquarters by surprise and captured
Mexican General (and dictator) Antonio López de Santa Anna, who bought
his freedom by agreeing to the independence of the Republic of Texas. The
government of Mexico consented to this, on the condition that Texas would
remain an independent nation, and not be annexed by the United States—a
stipulation to which the latter agreed.
    The expansion of the United States to the West, however, could not be
stopped by a piece of paper. James K. Polk was elected president in 1844,
thus bringing to power those who felt that the nation should continue its
westward thrust. Even before the new president was sworn in, Texas was
made a state of the Union by a joint resolution of Congress. The next year
the phrase Manifest Destiny was used for the first time. That destiny—and
the powerful economic interests hiding behind it—required the conquest of
Mexico’s northern lands. But there were still many in the United States who
opposed such expansion, agreeing with John Quincy Adams who said
before the House of Representatives, that in a war with Mexico “the
banners of freedom will be the banners of Mexico; and your banners, I
blush to speak the word, will be the banners of slavery.”14 Therefore, it was
necessary to make Mexico fire the first shot, and Polk ordered General
Zachary Taylor into territory that the U.S. disputed with Mexico. Years
later, Ulysses S. Grant, who as a young lieutenant had been part of that
expedition, declared: “We were sent to provoke a fight, but it was essential
that Mexico should commence it.”15 When the Mexican army refused to
open hostilities, Taylor was ordered to continue advancing until he drew
fire. When Mexico finally offered resistance, Polk obtained from Congress
a declaration of war. Grant was convinced that behind all these events
lurked a conspiracy to increase the number of slaveholding states.
    The brief war was concluded by the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo in
1848, whereby Mexico ceded to the United States, in exchange for fifteen
million dollars, more than three million square kilometers—the present
states of New Mexico, Arizona, California, Utah, Nevada, and part of
Colorado—and agreed to the annexation of Texas by the United States, with
the Rio Grande as the border between the two nations. The treaty also
guaranteed the rights of Mexicans who decided to remain in the conquered
territory. But such rights were soon violated as new settlers moved onto the
land as if it had no owners, and discrimination against Mexicans as an
inferior race became common practice in the American Southwest.
    Before 1848, churches in the United States had been divided in their
opinions regarding the war and the notion of Manifest Destiny. Valiant
voices of protest rose against what was seen as naked aggression and as an
attempt to reinstitute slavery in lands where it had been banned. But after
the war, as settlers rushed to quench their thirst for land, churches joined the
westward movement, and soon several denominations were speaking of the
door that God had opened for the evangelization of Mexicans.
    The conquest of these lands had different consequences for Roman
Catholicism. The most important was the sudden addition to its membership
of a large flock belonging to an entirely different culture from that of the
rest of North American Catholics. For several decades, American
Catholicism refused to accept that difference, and worked toward the
Americanization of its new constituency. In 1850, the Catholic Church in
the Southwest was put in the hands of a hierarchy drawn from the East, and
the number of Hispanic priests declined rapidly. Mexican-American
historians have documented a marked contrast between the older Mexican
priests, who lived among the people and served the poor, and the new ones
brought from the East, who moved mostly among the English-speaking
settlers and were content with saying mass for the deprived Mexicans. An
example of this was the conflict between Father Antonio José Martínez—
known among the native population as el cura de Taos—and the vicar
general for New Mexico, Jean Baptiste Lamy. Although of French
background, Lamy served under the diocese of Baltimore, and was a close
friend of many of the new citizens of the area—Kit Carson among them.
Since 1824, Martínez had headed a seminary in Taos, and most of the older
clergy of the area had been trained by him. Although he openly rejected
celibacy, many in the area called him a saint, for he devoted his entire life to
the care of the poor. When Lamy ordered Martínez and the other Mexican
clergy to be more assiduous in collecting the tithes of their flock and
sending them to his office, they responded that it was immoral and
unchristian to take money from the poor to give to the rich. Lamy
excommunicated the refractory priest and his followers, but they continued
in their ministry among the Mexicans, serving them as priests and
administering the sacraments in open schism with the hierarchy of the
church. The movement continued for some years after the death of
Martínez, in 1867. As it waned, so did the number of Mexicans offering
themselves for the priesthood. It was not until well into the twentieth
century that there was in the Southwest a Catholic bishop of Hispanic
origin.

                      SLAVERY AND CIVIL WAR
From colonial times, the issue of slavery had troubled the conscience of
many. As independence approached, there were those who voiced the
opinion that the new nation should be born free of such an evil institution.
However, in order to present a common front against Great Britain, such
voices were silenced, and the United States, while calling itself the land of
the free, continued allowing the practice of slavery, though several
denominations took a clear stance against it. In 1776, the Quakers expelled
from their midst all who insisted on holding slaves. The Christmas
Conference in 1784 that organized American Methodists as a separate
church also banned slaveholding among its members. And many Baptists,
although lacking a national organization that could take similar measures,
nevertheless took a stance against slavery.
    Those early stances, however, were modified with the passage of time.
Only the Friends—who in any case were not numerous in the South—
remained firm. Methodists as well as Baptists sought to attract the
slaveholding whites of the South by moderating their opposition to slavery.
By 1843, over a thousand Methodist ministers and preachers owned slaves.
Other denominations were equally ambivalent. For instance, in 1818 the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, while declaring slavery to be
against the law of God, also went on record as opposing its abolition, and
deposed a minister for advocating abolition.
    At first, antislavery sentiments were equally strong in both the North and
the South. In 1817, the American Colonization Society was founded with
the purpose of buying slaves, freeing them, and returning them to Africa.
The founding of the Republic of Liberia was largely the result of the
Society’s work. But such efforts had little impact on slavery in general.
Meanwhile, the abolitionist movement was gaining strength in the North,
where slavery was of less economic importance, while the South, whose
economic and social system was based on slave labor, took the opposite
tack. Soon, many in the South were preaching that slavery was an
institution sanctioned by God, and that even blacks profited from it, for by
it they had been snatched out of pagan and uncivilized Africa and given the
advantages of the gospel. In the North, the abolitionist movement was
equally vehement in its conviction that God did not will slavery. Many in
the Methodist Church began demanding that the old position of the church
against slavery be reasserted. When, in 1844, the Methodist General
Conference condemned the bishop of Georgia for holding slaves, the church
split, and the following year witnessed the birth of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, South. Something similar happened among Baptists, for when their
missionary agency refused to commission a candidate who had been
recommended by the Georgia Baptist Convention on the grounds that he
owned slaves, the Southern Baptist Convention was born. In 1861,
reflecting the nation’s division, the Southern presbyteries withdrew from
the Presbyterian Church and founded their own denomination. These
divisions persisted into the twentieth century, when some of them were
healed, and others were not. The only major denomination that was able to
weather the storm without schism was the Catholic Church. The Episcopal
Church, although divided during the war, was reunited almost immediately
after the end of the conflict.
    In 1861, the nation was split, first by the secession of the Confederate
States of America, and then by civil war. During the armed conflict, pulpits
on both sides defended the justice of their cause. After the war, hatred and
prejudice were fostered because—after the period of Reconstruction, which
essentially meant Northern military occupation—the South became an
economic colony of the North. Southern whites were permitted to manage
political and social matters as long as they did not interfere with Northern
economic interests and their investments in the area. Southern whites,
unable to vent their anger on the North, turned it toward the black
population. Fear of blacks was fostered from many Southern pulpits, and
when that fear led to the founding of the Ku Klux Klan there were
preachers who openly supported its activities. The same hatred and fear of
the North also led to anti-intellectualism and conservatism in the Southern
churches, for most of the great educational centers were in the North, and
any ideas coming from them were suspect.
    Since southern whites could vent their anger and frustration on blacks,
they did so. During Reconstruction, blacks were given positions of
responsibility by the Northern invaders. But this served only to exacerbate
the prejudice of Southern whites against them, and as soon as
Reconstruction came to an end Southern whites moved to restrict the rights
and power of blacks. In 1892, the U.S. Supreme Court approved
segregation, which allowed for the enactment of local laws that mandated
public services and facilities be separated along racial lines. Though these
so-called Jim Crow laws required “separate but equal” rights for all races,
they effectively excluded blacks from public places, from the right to vote,
from a good public education, and so forth. Meanwhile, Southern white
churches continued their racist teachings and practices. Blacks who had
formerly attended such churches as slaves were now encouraged to leave
them, and this in turn gave rise to various black denominations. Black
Baptists formed their own congregations, that later joined in the National
Baptist Convention. Black Methodists founded the Colored Methodist
Episcopal Church—the C.M.E. Church, later to become the Christian
Methodist Episcopal Church. Meanwhile, Northern churches—particularly
Presbyterian and Methodist churches—began work among blacks in the
South.




Blacks were encouraged to leave white churches and form their own, such as this one in Washington.

    But the North was not exempt from prejudice and segregation. Even
before the Civil War such attitudes had led to the formation of two black
denominations that would later play an important role among freed blacks
in the South: the African Methodist Episcopal Church, and the African
Methodist Episcopal Zion Church. The former was founded by Richard
Allen, who lived as a free man and became the first black ordained a deacon
in the North American Methodist Church. Allen organized a local church
for blacks in Philadelphia, but repeated conflicts with the white hierarchy of
his denomination eventually led to its separation from the white church and
the birth of a new denomination. Five years later, in 1821, similar events in
New York led to the creation of the African Methodist Episcopal Zion
Church. Both of these denominations played an important role among
Northern blacks and, after the Civil War, also in the South. They also have
done important missionary work in Africa.
   Black churches soon grew to be one of the principal institutions of black
society. Since the only prestigious position to which blacks had relatively
free access was the ministry, for a century most black leaders were also
pastors. Some black churches advocated submission to present injustice
while awaiting a heavenly reward. In others, more radical words of justice
and black dignity were heard. But all contributed to the sense of identity
and cohesion among blacks that would be the backbone of the struggle for
civil rights a hundred years later.




  Richard Allen, a free man who became the first black ordained a deacon in the North American
                                      Methodist Church.

              FROM THE CIVIL WAR TO WORLD WAR I
The social and economic tensions of earlier decades increased after the end
of the Civil War. The South became even more racist and anti-intellectual.
In the North, immigration brought about rapid urban growth, and
ecclesiastical structures proved unequal to the challenges of that growth and
of the increasing number of blacks who moved to the North seeking a better
life. In the West, relentless pressure continued to be applied on Indian lands,
and Hispanics were the object of discrimination.
    In the midst of such diversity, one element contributing to the unity of
the nation was the notion that it would play a providential role in the
progress of humankind. Usually that role was understood in terms of racial,
religious, and institutional superiority—that is, the superiority of the white
race, the Protestant faith, and democratic government based on free
enterprise. Thus, late in the century the general secretary of the Evangelical
Alliance, Josiah Strong, declared that God was preparing the Anglo-Saxon
race, for a great moment, “the final competition of races” at which point
that race, representing “the largest liberty, the purest Christianity, the
highest civilization,”16 would fulfill its God-given destiny of dispossessing
the weaker ones, assimilating others, and molding the rest, so as to “Anglo-
Saxonize” humankind. And such sentiments, expressed by one of the
leaders of the conservative wing of American Protestantism, were similar to
those of the liberal wing, who held that Protestantism and freedom of
thought and opinion were the great contribution of the Nordic races against
the tyranny and Catholicism of southern European races, and that therefore
people of Nordic origin had the responsibility of civilizing the “backward”
races of the rest of the world.
    Such notions, however, contrasted with the urban reality of the United
States itself, where recent immigrants were being exploited and living in
overcrowded conditions, lacking all contact with organized Christianity—
particularly in its Protestant form. Protestantism sought to respond to this
challenge in various ways. One was the establishment of several
organizations whose goal was to serve the urban masses. Most successful
among these were the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) and the
Young Women’s Christian Association (YWCA), both imported from
England in the mid-nineteenth century. Another Protestant response to the
challenge of the new population was the creation of Sunday schools. At a
time when the study of the Bible at home was falling by the wayside, and
the knowledge of Scripture among the masses was waning, Sunday schools
played a very important role. Eventually, there were churches where Sunday
school surpassed Sunday worship in importance. In 1872, several large
denominations began the practice—which continued into the twenty-first
century—of agreeing on the Scriptural texts to be used in Sunday school,
and this in turn was a significant step toward greater understanding and
collaboration across denominational lines.
    Protestantism also responded to the urban challenge by adapting the old
camp meetings to the new situation, and revivals became an important
element of the urban religious scene. The main figure in the early stages of
this development was Dwight L. Moody. Moody was a Chicago shoe
salesman who was moved to act by the lack of religious life among the
masses of that great city. He began bringing people to the Congregationalist
church he attended, but he soon founded an independent church. He also
became involved in the work of the YMCA, where he was noted for his zeal
in communicating the gospel to others. It was in 1872, while visiting
London in connection with his YMCA responsibilities, that he was first
invited to preach. The result was so encouraging that Moody then felt called
to preach to the urban masses, first in England, and then in the United
States. His method consisted of simple and emotive preaching, calling
people to repentance and to accept salvation offered in Jesus Christ. He was
convinced that the conversion of the masses would lead to better living
conditions in the cities, and therefore he had little to say regarding the
conditions and social structures that led to so much human misery. But there
is no doubt that his message and style were singularly well adapted to the
felt needs of the urban masses. Soon he had many imitators, some more
successful than others and the revival became part of the American urban
landscape.
    New denominations arose in response to the urban challenge as well.
Within the Methodist tradition, in both England and in the United States,
there were many who felt that their church had abandoned some basic
elements of Wesley’s teachings. It was clear that Methodists had been
progressively moving toward the middle classes, and paying less attention
to the poor, especially the urban poor. Since it was precisely among such
people that the movement had achieved its early success, there were many
who sought to return to that earlier emphasis. In England, this gave rise to
the Salvation Army, founded by Methodist preacher William Booth and his
wife Catherine Munford—who was also a preacher, for one of the
characteristic notes of the Salvation Army was the equality of the sexes
within it. It was also concerned with both the spiritual and the physical
well-being of people living in urban centers, and soon became known for its
relief work among the poor, providing food, shelter, work, and so forth.
Given the conditions of urban life in the United States, when the Salvation
Army was brought over from England it found a fertile soil for its work.
    Out of the Methodists’ dissatisfaction with the direction their church had
taken, several new ecclesiastical bodies were born in the United States.
These groups wished to return both to the earlier concern for the masses,
and to Wesley’s teachings on sanctification. Because of this latter emphasis,
these churches became collectively known as holiness churches. At first
there were many such groups, though they were unconnected to one
another. But slowly they crystallized into several new denominations. The
most numerous in attendance was the Church of the Nazarene, organized in
1908 through the union of several holiness churches. But still, the main
strength of the holiness movement was in the hundreds of independent
churches, and in others belonging to very small denominations, scattered
throughout the country.




            Phoebe Palmer was an outstanding leader in the holiness movement.

   One of the leading voices in the holiness movement was Phoebe Palmer
(1807–1874), a Methodist who, in 1835, began leading women’s prayer
meetings in her home. Four years later, men began joining her meetings.
Her movement and her influence grew as she began speaking in public, to
the point that by the middle of the century she was traveling extensively in
the United States as well as in Canada, Great Britain, and continental
Europe; there she conducted and spoke at “holiness revivals.” Palmer was
convinced that perfect holiness—the second blessing after conversion—
must be the goal and the outcome of the Christian life. For this, she drew
severe criticism from many of the leaders of her own Methodist Episcopal
Church, who claimed that her views turned sanctification into an almost
mechanical process. But she persisted in her views, while also emphasizing
the social dimensions of holiness, which does not consist merely of
personal purity and devotion but also in actions of love. On this basis she
founded the Methodist Ladies’ Home Missionary Society, which
established work in some of the most deprived urban areas of the nation.
Her work—and the work of many other women of similar persuasions—
contributed to what would later become the American Feminist movement.
    Worship in many holiness churches was marked by the outpouring of the
gifts of the Spirit—speaking in tongues, miracles of healing, and prophetic
utterances. Such practices, eventually abandoned by many holiness
churches, reappeared with great vigor in 1906, in the Azusa Street Mission
of Los Angeles. The movement began among a small group of believers
meeting at a private home on Bonnie Brae Street. They were led by pastor
William J. Seymour, a former slave who had been profoundly influenced by
Pentecostal preacher Charles Parham, and whose preaching on the gift of
tongues had led to his being banned from the pulpit. In the house on Bonnie
Brae there were sudden manifestations of the power of the Spirit,
particularly speaking in tongues. Inspired by those events, Seymour’s
followers moved to a larger location on Azusa Street. From that point on,
Pentecostal fire, starting from that Azusa Street revival, spread throughout
the nation. Since there were both black and white members on Azusa Street,
the movement spread among both races—although eventually much of it
resulted in churches reflecting the racial lines that divided the nation. It then
moved beyond the limits of the Wesleyan tradition, and was taken up by
many Baptists and others. By 1914, the director of a Pentecostal publication
called for a great gathering of “believers in the baptism of the Holy Spirit,”
and out of that gathering emerged the Assemblies of God, the main
Pentecostal denomination in the United States. The Assemblies and other
Pentecostal denominations made significant inroads among the urban
masses, and soon moved both to the rural areas and to distant countries,
where they sent numerous missionaries. In the following century, this
movement begun at Azusa Street would be a dominant element in the
global Christian landscape.
   Although it had gone through a long process of formation, another
denomination that took its definitive form after the Civil War was the
Seventh Day Adventists. Early in the nineteenth century, Vermont Baptist
William Miller, by combining data taken from Daniel with other elements
from Genesis and the rest of Scripture, had come to the conclusion that the
Lord would return in 1843. When that date arrived and passed, most of
Miller’s followers left him. But a small remnant continued anxiously
awaiting the Lord’s return. The movement then led a precarious existence
until the appearance of Prophet Ellen Harmon White. By then, through
contacts with Seventh Day Baptists, they had begun keeping the Sabbath on
Saturdays, and holding their major worship services on that day instead of
Sunday. White was a superb organizer whose published visions attracted the
remnants of Miller’s followers and many others, and these finally organized
into a single body in 1868. Under White’s leadership, the Adventists took
great interest in medicine, dietetics, and missions. By the time she died in
1915, the movement had thousands of adherents both in the United States
and several other nations. On this last score, this particular denomination
led the way by ceasing to be a strict North American denomination with
branches or missions overseas, and reorganizing itself in truly international
fashion.




  The house on Bonnie Brae Street where the Azusa Street revival began is now a museum of early
                                      Pentecostal history.
    Protestantism in the United States had other challenges to face besides
urban growth, and of these the most important was intellectual in character.
Europe was constantly sending across the Atlantic, not only immigrants, but
also ideas that questioned much that had earlier been taken for granted.
Darwin’s theory of evolution seemed to contradict the stories of creation in
Genesis, and therefore produced quite a stir among the masses. But among
theologians a greater challenge was posed by the historical and critical
studies that were taking place in Europe. Such studies raised doubts about
the historical authenticity of several—if not most—books of the Bible. As a
methodological presupposition, all that seemed extraordinary or miraculous
was to be rejected. In the same academic circles, great optimism prevailed
regarding the human creature and its capabilities. Thanks to evolution and
progress, the day was at hand when humans would be able to solve
problems until then insoluble, thus bringing in a new age of joy, freedom,
justice, peace, and abundance.
    Protestant Liberalism was an attempt to couch Christianity in the mold
of those ideas, and gained wide acceptance among the intellectual elite in
the United States. It was by no means a monolithic movement, for the very
idea of liberalism implied freedom to think as one saw fit—as long as one
did not fall into what liberals called superstition. But it was a vast wave of
thought that many saw as a denial of the Christian faith. In that wave there
was a relatively small number of radicals—sometimes called modernists—
for whom Christianity and the Bible were little more than another religion
and one great book among many. But most liberals were committed
Christians whose very commitment drove them to respond to the
intellectual challenges of their time in the hope of making the faith credible
for modern people. In any case, liberalism in the United States was limited
almost entirely to the Northeast, and to the middle and upper classes, for
whom the intellectual issues of the day seemed more pressing than the
social conditions of urban laborers. In the South and the West, liberalism
had little impact.
    The reaction was not slow in coming, for many saw liberalism as a
threat to the very core of the Christian faith. At the popular level, probably
the issue most discussed was the theory of evolution, and there were even
attempts to have courts of law decide on the matter. As late as the early
decades of the twenty-first century, debate continued in some areas as to
whether public schools should be allowed to teach the theory of evolution,
and as to how this should be done so as not to contradict Scripture. But
conservative theologians clearly saw that the question of evolution was only
one instance of the threat the new ideas posed to the fundamentals of
Christianity. Soon the term fundamentals became characteristic of the anti-
liberal reaction that came to be called fundamentalism. In 1846, when that
movement was beginning to crystallize, the Evangelical Alliance was
formed, seeking to join all those who saw liberalism as a denial of the faith.
But it was in 1895, at a meeting in Niagara Falls, New York, that the
movement listed the five fundamentals that could not be denied without
falling into the error of liberalism. These were the inerrancy of Scripture,
the divinity of Jesus, the Virgin birth, Jesus’ death on the cross as a
substitute for our sins, and his physical resurrection and impending return.
Shortly thereafter, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church
adopted similar principles. From that point on, and for several decades, the
majority of Protestants, particularly in the South, were fundamentalists.
    On the other hand, it is significant to note that, while fundamentalism
declared itself a defender of traditional orthodoxy, it gave rise to new
interpretations of the Bible. Its emphasis on biblical inerrancy and its
rejection of many of the conclusions of biblical scholars made it possible to
juxtapose texts from different books of Scripture, and thus to develop a
number of schemes outlining and explaining God’s actions, past, present,
and future. The most successful of these schemes were those of the
dispensationalists—of which there were several. The most popular
dispensationalist scheme was developed by Cyrus Scofield, who divided
human history into seven dispensations—the present one being the sixth. In
1909, the Scofield Bible was published, outlining this interpretation of
history, and it soon became widely used in fundamentalist circles. Thus,
fundamentalism became closely tied with dispensationalism—although
many fundamentalists differed from Scofield in matters of detail.
    Meanwhile, liberalism was making its most significant contribution in
what came to be called the Social Gospel. This was not the belief of most
liberals, who belonged to the urban middle classes, and were scarcely
interested in the plight of the poor. But a small core of liberals did devote
their efforts to exploring and showing the relationship between the demands
of the gospel and the misery in which the urban masses lived. Their leader
was Walter Rauschenbush, who was a professor of church history at a
Baptist seminary from 1897 until his death in 1918. He insisted that the
social and economic life of the nation should conform to the requirements
of the gospel, and showed that economic liberalism—the theory that the law
of supply and demand suffices to regulate the marketplace—results in great
inequity and social injustice. The task of Christians in that context is to seek
to limit the unbridled power of runaway capital, and to advocate the
enactment of laws that will aid the poor and promote greater justice. The
point of contact between the Social Gospel and the rest of liberalism was
their common optimism regarding human capabilities and the progress of
society. But while other liberals simply trusted the natural progress of
humanity and of capitalist society, the proponents of the Social Gospel
feared that so-called progress would take place at the expense of the poor.
    Both fundamentalism and liberalism reached their apex at a time when
the political and economic future of the United States seemed assured. The
war with Mexico, the abolition of slavery, and the war with Spain in 1898
seemed to promise that the United States—and the white race that ruled the
nation—were destined to lead the world into an era of progress and
prosperity. Then World War I broke out, followed by a period of economic
distress. How this affected Christianity in the United States is a subject to
which we shall return later in this chapter.

                             NEW RELIGIONS
One of the most remarkable phenomena in the religious life of the United
States during the nineteenth century was the birth of several movements
that so differed from traditional Christianity that they could well be called
new religions. The largest of these were the Mormon faith, Jehovah’s
Witnesses, and Christian Science.
    During his early years, Joseph Smith, the founder of Mormonism,
seemed to be a failure. His parents were poor rural folk who had moved to
New York from Vermont seeking, and failing to find, better economic
conditions. Young Joseph was not inclined to labor in the fields, preferring
to seek hidden treasures and to claim that he had visions telling him where
such treasures could be found. He then declared that an angel named
Moroni had appeared to him and had given him a collection of golden
tablets written in ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs, as well as two seer’s stones
with which it was possible to read the tablets. Smith hid behind a curtain
and dictated his translation of the sacred tablets to scribes on the other side
of the curtain. The result was the Book of Mormon, published in 1830. The
book also included the testimony of several witnesses who affirmed that
they had seen the tablets before Moroni took them back.
    Soon after publishing his book Smith had many followers. They were
joined by an entire group who had already been practicing communal
living, and the Mormons adopted a similar structure. According to them,
their new religion was to Christianity what Christianity was to Judaism: its
culmination. Meanwhile, Smith continued having new visions that led him
further away from orthodox Christianity. After settling for a time in Ohio,
he and his followers moved to Illinois, where they founded an autonomous
community, with its own militia, and where Smith was eventually called
King of the Kingdom of God. But tensions with surrounding society grew,
especially when Smith declared himself a candidate for the presidency of
the United States. Eventually, an unruly mob lynched the prophet and one
of his followers.




  Brigham Young succeeded Joseph Smith, and under his leadership the Mormons reached Utah,
                                    where they settled.

  The leadership of the movement fell to Brigham Young, who led the
Mormons—more precisely, the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter Day
Saints—to Utah. They founded a state that remained autonomous, until the
United States took possession of the area in 1850, as part of its westward
expansion. This produced new conflicts. Two years later Young declared
that Smith had had a vision, until then kept secret, reinstituting polygamy.
In 1857, war broke out between the Mormons and the United States.
Eventually and progressively, the Mormons allowed themselves to be
shaped by the rest of society, leaving behind their emphasis on visions and
community living, and finally, in 1890, officially abandoning polygamy—
although it continued to be practiced in secret among some. Their political
influence in Utah was substantial, and their missionaries soon spread their
faith to several other nations.
    The faith of Jehovah’s Witnesses was a result of the manner in which
many were reading Scripture, as a book where hidden clues could be found
regarding future events and the end of the world. In its early stages, the
movement also crystallized some of the resentment of the lower classes
against the religious, political, and social establishment. Thus, Charles T.
Russell, the founder of the new faith, declared that the three great
instruments of Satan were government, business, and the church. He also
rejected the doctrine of the Trinity and the divinity of Jesus, and declared
that the Second Coming had taken place in 1872, and that the end would be
in 1914.
    The year 1914 brought World War I, but not the Armaggedon predicted
by Russell, who died two years later. He was then succeeded by Joseph F.
Rutherford, better known as Judge Rutherford. It was he who, in 1931,
named the movement Jehovah’s Witnesses, and who also organized it into a
vast missionary machine, while reinterpreting Russell’s teachings after the
fiasco of 1914.
    Christian Science was the main expression in the United States of a long
religious tradition that we have repeatedly encountered in our narrative,
when dealing with Gnosticism, Manicheism, Spiritualism, and so forth. In
general, that tradition holds that the material world is either imaginary or of
secondary importance, that the purpose of human life is to live in harmony
with the Universal Spirit, and that Scripture is to be interpreted by means of
a spiritual clue, which is usually unknown to the majority of Christians. The
founder of Christian Science, Mary Baker Eddy, suffered repeated illnesses
during her youth. Twice married and widowed, poor and sick, suffering
from acute pain that extensive use of morphine could not assuage, she
finally went to P. P. Quimby, who claimed that illness was error, and that the
knowledge of truth sufficed to cure it. Having been healed by Quimby, she
became his disciple and apostle. Several years after Quimby’s death, in
1875, she published Science and Health, with a Key to Scripture. During
her lifetime, this book was reprinted 381 times. In it, Eddy used traditional
terms of Christian orthodoxy, such as God, Christ, Salvation, Trinity, and so
forth, in a spiritual sense that differed from the traditional one—a practice
reminiscent of the ancient Gnostic interpretations of Scripture, where words
such as truth and life took a unique meaning. She held that illness was a
mental error, the result of a mistaken perspective, and that to heal it one
should not make use of physicians or drugs, but rather of the spiritual
science that Jesus employed, and that she now had rediscovered. Likewise,
the knowledge of such science would produce happiness and prosperity—as
the middle class of the United States understood those terms.
    The Church of Christ, Scientist, was officially founded in 1879, and it
soon had followers throughout the nation. Two years later, Mary Baker
Eddy founded in Boston a Metaphysical College, where practitioners—not
pastors—of Christian Science were trained. She then developed a very
centralized organization, completely under her control. The church in
Boston was declared the Mother Church, to which all who wished to be
members of the Church of Christ, Scientist, had to belong. She also took
steps to ensure that no doctrinal deviation would ever find a place in her
movement. She declared that the Second Coming of Christ had taken place
in the divine inspiration with which her book was written. In order to avoid
any variant doctrine, she banned preaching in her churches, placing in its
stead prescribed readings of selected texts from the Bible and from her
book. These texts, selected and prescribed by Mary Baker Eddy, are still
read in worship by her followers, alternately by a man and a woman—for
women have always held an important place in the movement.
    In spite of the happiness and health that her doctrines promised, the last
years of Mary Baker Eddy were filled with pain and anguish. Her physical
pain could only be alleviated through increasing doses of morphine, and her
spiritual anguish was such that she felt the need to be constantly surrounded
by her followers, and thus protected from the waves of animal magnetism
of her enemies.
    As one now looks back at the shape and course of Christianity in the
United State during the first century after independence, one is struck by the
seemingly endless series of new denominations and movements that divided
Christians, and by the impact of the social and economic order of the
United States on the religion of the nation. Some denominations arose out
of the diversity of religious traditions that immigrants from various
countries brought with them, and others out of an attempt to purify the
church by creating a new body, purer than the rest in doctrine, worship, and
morals. Others arose out of political and social disagreements, particularly
on the issue of slavery and its abolition. And still others arose out of
literalistic interpretations of a few particular texts in Scripture in which
someone claimed to have found the key to all of Scripture and all of history.
Since the decades that followed marked the great age of American
expansion, political as well as economic and religious, the events and
currents we have just discussed have left their mark on Christian
communities throughout the world—particularly in Latin America, Asia,
and Africa, as we shall see in an upcoming chapter.
                                   28

   A Shifting Landscape: Western Europe


   There is no religious system or superstition that is not based on
   ignorance of the laws of nature. The creators and defenders of such
   folly did not foresee the progress of the human intellect. Being
   convinced that in their age all was known that would ever be known .
   . . they based their dreams on the opinions of their time.


ANTOINE-NICOLAS DE CONDORCET

The last years of the eighteenth century saw far-reaching political and
cultural upheavals in Europe. Although such events took place in various
countries, the most important were those connected with the French
Revolution.

                     THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
Louis XVI—the king whom we have already mentioned as having decreed
tolerance for French Protestants—was neither a good ruler nor a wise
politician. During his reign, economic conditions in France grew steadily
worse, particularly for the poor, while the expenditures of the king and his
court soared. The crown sought funds from the nobility and the clergy, two
groups that had traditionally been free of taxes. When they resisted, the
king and his ministers called the Estates General, the French equivalent of
parliament, composed of three estates or orders: the clergy, the nobility, and
the bourgeoisie. Since the king’s purpose was to use the Estates General to
overcome the resistance of the clergy and the nobility, his ministers
suggested that things be arranged so that the Third Estate—the bourgeoisie
—would have more representatives than the other two. Steps were also
taken so that the clergy would be represented, not only by bishops and other
members of the hierarchy, but also by parish priests whose sympathies
would run against the interests of the nobility and the hierarchy. When the
assembly finally gathered on May 4, 1789, the Third Estate had more
members than the other two together; and among the clergy less than a third
were prelates. When the time came to open the sessions, the Third Estate
insisted that the assembly should function as a single chamber, with
decisions to be made by a simple majority. The clergy and the nobility
preferred meeting as three chambers, which would give them two votes
against the one of the Third Estate. But the bourgeoisie remained firm.
Some priests, resenting the aristocratic leanings of the prelates, joined the
Third Estate, and finally these two groups declared themselves a National
Assembly, arguing that they represented the majority of the nation. Two
days later the clergy voted to join the National Assembly.
   While all these maneuvers were taking place, the economy continued to
worsen, and hunger became even more widespread. Fearing the actions that
the National Assembly might take, the government closed its meeting hall
and ordered it disbanded. But its members refused to obey and solemnly
swore to continue their sessions until France had a constitution. The king
and his advisors responded by moving troops to the outskirts of Paris, and
deposing Jacques Necker, a Protestant banker and government minister who
was very popular among the bourgeoisie and the Paris populace. The people
of Paris then expressed their anger in a series of riots that culminated on
July 14, 1789, when they took the Bastille, an old fortress that served as a
prison for the king’s enemies.
   From that point on, momentous events followed in rapid sequence. The
king capitulated before the Third Estate, ordering the other two to join the
National Assembly in a new body, the National Constituent Assembly. This
group then issued the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen,
which was to become one of the fundamental documents of democratic
movements both in France and in other nations. When the king refused to
accept this and other decisions of the Assembly, the populace of Paris
rioted, and from that point on the king and his family were virtual prisoners
in the capital city.
    Following the principles of its own Declaration, and of the philosophers
whose political ideas were discussed in Chapter 22, the Assembly
reorganized the government of the nation, not only in its civil and economic
aspects, but also in terms of its religious life. The most important step in
this latter direction was the promulgation of the Civil Constitution of the
Clergy, in 1790. For centuries the French church had boasted of its Gallican
liberties which protected it from excessive interference by Rome, and
placed it under the jurisdiction of French bishops and the French crown.
Therefore, the National Constituent Assembly, which thought of itself as
the depository of national sovereignty, felt that it had the authority to
regulate the life and organization of the Catholic Church in France.
Furthermore, some sort of reorganization was necessary, for there were
many abuses. The highest positions in the hierarchy, occupied almost
exclusively by members of the aristocracy, were not used for shepherding
the flock but rather for the personal benefit of their occupants. Several
ancient monasteries and abbeys had become centers of leisurely and
luxurious living, and some abbots were known for their courtly and political
intrigues. All this was in need of reformation. But there were also many
members of the Assembly who were convinced that the church and its faith
were remainders of superstitious times now past, and should therefore be
destroyed. At the time of the Civil Constitution, those who hoped to see the
church disappear remained few, and played only a minor role. But as events
unfolded and the revolution became more extreme they came to the
foreground.
    Most of the measures included in the Civil Constitution were intended to
reform the church. But what was at issue was the very question of whether
the Assembly had the authority to issue such a decree “without consulting
the church”—as some put it. However, the exact identity of the “church”
that was to be consulted was not clear. Some suggested that a council of all
the French bishops be called. But the Assembly knew that such a council
would be in the hands of the ecclesiastical aristocracy. Others suggested
that the pope be consulted—and indeed, this was the option chosen by the
king before sanctioning the Assembly’s decree. But this in itself would
violate the national sovereignty, and would be a denial of the Gallican
liberties. Pope Pius VI sent word to King Louis XVI that the Civil
Constitution was a schismatic document that he would never accept. The
king, fearing the Assembly’s reaction, kept this decision secret, and
continued trying to convince the pope to change his stance. Under pressure
from the Assembly, the king agreed to the Civil Constitution, declaring that
his approval was tentative, and depended on the pope’s agreement. Finally,
the Assembly simply decreed that all who held ecclesiastical office must
swear allegiance to the Civil Constitution and that those who refused would
be deposed.
    The net result was that the church was divided. In theory, those who
refused to swear would suffer no other punishment besides loss of their
offices. On the basis of the Assembly’s own declaration on human rights,
they could not be deprived of their freedom of thought, and any who wished
to continue having them as priests were free to do so—with the significant
difference that those priests who had sworn would be supported by the
state, while those who refused would have to be supported by their own
followers. In fact, however, those who refused to swear soon became the
object of persecution, purportedly not on the basis of their religious
opinions but on suspicion of counterrevolutionary activities.
    Meanwhile, revolutionary movements were gaining strength in other
parts of Europe. Earlier revolutionary attempts in the Low Countries and
Switzerland had failed, but monarchs and the high nobility feared that the
French movement would spread to other lands. This in turn inspired the
French revolutionaries to more extreme measures. In 1791, the National
Constituent Assembly was succeeded by the Legislative Assembly, in
which there were far fewer voices of moderation. Half a year later, France
was at war with Austria and Prussia—thus beginning a long series of armed
conflicts that would continue almost without interruption until the end of
the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. When the fortunes of war turned against
France, the Assembly directed its wrath against the king, who clearly
sympathized with the foreign monarchs and aristocrats. At the Battle of
Valmy, the French were finally able to halt the enemy’s advance. The next
day, the National Convention took the place of the Legislative Assembly,
and on its first session the Convention abolished the monarchy and
proclaimed the Republic. Four months later, under accusation of high
treason, the king was tried, convicted, and executed. This, however, did not
put an end to the nation’s problems. Under the direction of the bourgeoisie,
and with the added burden of war and inner disorder, the national economy
was able to do little for the urban poor, and conditions were no better in the
countryside. The peasants in the region of La Vendée revolted. Fear of
foreign invasion mounted. All this led to a wave of terror where everybody
was suspected of counterrevolutionary sentiments, and most of the major
figures of the revolution were put to death one after another at the
guillotine.
    Combined with this was a strong reaction against Christianity, both
Catholic and Protestant. The new leaders of the revolution were convinced
that they were the harbingers of a new era in which science and reason
would overcome all superstition and religion—which, after all, were
nothing but the result of human ignorance. As the new age was being born,
the time had come to leave aside the unfounded beliefs of old. It was on this
basis that the French Revolution created its own religion, called first the
Cult of Reason, and later the Cult of the Supreme Being. By then the Civil
Constitution of the Clergy was forgotten, for the revolution wished to have
nothing to do with the church. Even the calendar was changed, giving way
to a more “reasonable” one in which weeks had ten days and months were
named after conditions of nature in each season—“Thermidor,”
“Germinal,” “Fructidor,” and so forth. Great ceremonies were also
developed to take the place of religious festivals—beginning with the
solemn procession taking Voltaire’s remains to the Pantheon of the
Republic. Then temples to Reason were built, and an official list of saints
was issued—which included Jesus, Socrates, Marcus Aurelius, and
Rousseau. Other rites were prescribed for weddings, the dedication of
children to Freedom, and funerals.
    All this would have been merely ridiculous, were it not for its cost in
suffering and bloodshed. The promoters of the new religion made use of the
guillotine with cruel liberality. Christian worship was supposedly permitted;
but any priest who refused to swear before the altar of Freedom could be
accused of counterrevolutionary activity and sent to the guillotine. Thus,
between two thousand and five thousand priests were executed, as well as
several dozen nuns and countless lay people. Many others died in prison. In
the end, no distinction was made between those who had sworn allegiance
to the Civil Constitution, those who had refused to do so, and Protestants. In
fact, French Protestantism—the old church of the desert—proved unready
for the challenge, and was unable to respond with the same measure of
heroism as the Catholics. Although the reign of terror abated in 1795,
official government policy continued opposing Christianity. The military
victories of the French in Switzerland, Italy, and the Low Countries
extended a similar policy to those areas. In 1798, the French invaded the
papal lands and captured Pope Pius VI, whom they took to France as a
prisoner.
    Napoleon Bonaparte, who had been gaining power in the army for some
time, became master of France in November 1799. Pius VI had died a few
months earlier, still a prisoner of the French. But Napoleon was convinced
that the best policy was to seek a measure of reconciliation with the
Catholic Church, and therefore opened negotiations with the new pope, Pius
VII. It is said—probably with little basis in fact—that Napoleon sent a
message to the pope to the effect that he wished to “make him a present of
forty million French citizens.” Finally, in 1801, the papacy and the French
government agreed to a Concordat that provided for the naming of bishops
and other prelates in such a way that the interests of both church and state
would be safeguarded. Three years later, Napoleon decided that the title of
First Consul, which he held, was not enough, and took that of emperor in a
coronation ceremony presided by Pius VII. By then he had also decreed
religious freedom for Protestants. Oddly enough, all these difficulties
served to increase the authority of the pope over the French church. Until
then, French kings and bishops had insisted on the Gallican liberties,
precluding popes from direct intervention in the affairs of the French
church. Now the emperor allowed the pope a greater measure of authority
on the internal affairs of the French church—as long as papal actions did
not interfere with the emperor’s policies.
    That agreement, however, did not last long, for the ambition of the
emperor clashed with the firmness of the pope. As a result, Pius VII saw his
lands invaded once again by the French, who made him a prisoner. But even
in his captivity the pope remained firm, refusing to countenance Napoleon’s
actions, and particularly condemning his divorce from Josephine. Pius
remained a prisoner until the fall of Napoleon, when he was restored to
Rome. There he proclaimed a general amnesty for all his enemies, and
interceded for Napoleon before the British victors.




Napoleon was crowned emperor in a ceremony over which Pope Pius VII presided. When Napoleon
saw this painting by David, he ordered the painter to alter the pope’s gesture, so as to make it more
                                     favorable to the emperor.

                            THE NEW EUROPE
The Napoleonic Wars had created chaos throughout Europe. Reigning
houses had been overthrown in Spain, Portugal, Italy, the Low Countries,
and Scandinavia. After Napoleon’s defeat, the main powers that had
opposed him—Britain, Austria, Prussia, and Russia—determined the future
shape of Europe’s political map. The borders of France were set where they
had been before the Revolution, and the house of Bourbon was restored in
the person of Louis XVIII, a brother of Louis XVI. Most of the monarchs
whom Napoleon had deposed were restored to their thrones. João VI of
Portugal, who had fled to Brazil, did not immediately return to Lisbon, and
when he did he left the government of Brazil in the hands of his son Pedro.
The Netherlands and Belgium were placed under a single monarch. In
Sweden, the crown was allowed to remain on the brow of Bernadotte, one
of Napoleon’s former marshals who had proven to be a wise and popular
ruler. It was hoped that these arrangements would bring peace to a continent
tired of war. Such hopes were not ill-founded, for—with the exceptions of
the Crimean War in 1854–1856 and the Franco-Prussian war in 1870–1871
—the rest of the century was a period of relative peace.
    But under the surface of that international peace, social and political
tensions led to conspiracies, revolts, and upheavals. One of the main
sources of unrest was the quest for national unity among Italians and among
Germans. Neither Italy nor Germany had yet achieved political unity, and in
each of these countries there was a growing sentiment that the time had
come for such unity. Those goals were opposed by the rulers of Austria,
whose domains lacked cultural unity and included vast areas of Germany
and Italy. Under the direction of the chancellor of Austria, C.L. Metternich,
a vast network of international spies and saboteurs developed, with the clear
goal of preventing German and Italian unity, and of undermining the
various liberal and socialist movements in Europe.
    Economic liberalism—not to be confused with theological liberalism—
was enthusiastically espoused by the growing mercantile and capitalist
bourgeoisie. At the heart of this economic liberalism was the doctrine of
laissez faire—or let do—economics, which held that the law of supply and
demand sufficed to regulate the marketplace and the entire economic order;
and therefore no government regulations or restraints were necessary.
According to this theory—in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries
espoused by many who would today be called conservatives—governments
should not intervene by regulating trade or the use of capital. Since at that
time the Industrial Revolution was having the greatest impact on the
continent of Europe, it was also a time when capital grew enormously—a
growth that the theory of laissez faire did nothing to impede. The theory
was that as capital grew and industry developed, the economic status of the
poor would also improve. Such economic liberalism often went hand-in-
hand with political liberalism, a stance that set great store by universal
suffrage (although usually only for males) and constitutional monarchy
modeled after the example of the United Kingdom.
    The struggle between these ideas and earlier absolutism had different
results in various countries. In Spain, Ferdinand VII restored
prerevolutionary absolutism. In France, Louis XVIII showed greater
prudence by establishing a parliamentary system. In Germany, Prussia
became the champion of national unity, while Austria supported the old
order. In Italy, some sought national unity under the kingdoms of Piedmont
and Sardinia, others hoped to establish a republic, and still others saw the
papacy as the center around which national unity should be built. In 1830,
Belgium became independent from the Netherlands—a move in which
religious sentiments played an important role, for Belgium was Catholic
and the Netherlands Protestant. That same year, republican elements tried to
overthrow the French monarchy. Although they did not achieve their goal,
they did bring about the downfall of Charles X—a conservative ruler who
had succeeded his brother Louis XVIII—and the crowning of Louis
Philippe d’Orleans, a ruler of fairly liberal inclinations.
    The year 1848 brought new revolutions. There were riots and revolts in
Germany, Italy, Belgium, Great Britain, Switzerland, and France.
Switzerland gained a new constitution. In France, Louis Philippe was
overthrown and the Second Republic was proclaimed. This lasted until
1851, when Louis Napoleon, a nephew of the now-deceased emperor, took
power and proclaimed himself emperor under the name Napoleon III. That
same year marked the fall of Metternich in Austria; and the publication by
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels of their Communist Manifesto—an event
that went practically unnoticed at the time.
    The map of Italy began changing shortly after Camillo di Cavour
became premier of the kingdom of Piedmont in 1852. With the help of
Napoleon III, Cavour began the vast enterprise of Italian unity. At the time
of his death in 1861, the new kingdom of Italy included the entire
peninsula, excluding the territories of Venice and Rome. The first was
annexed in 1866, when Prussia intervened against Austria’s continued
efforts to keep Italy divided. The story of Rome and the Papal States is
more complex. In 1849, the revolutionary wave that was sweeping Europe
led to the creation of the Roman Republic, and Pope Pius IX had to appeal
to Napoleon III to restore him to his papal throne. Under French protection,
the Papal States were then able to retain independence, though it was
constantly threatened. Finally, at the time of the war between France and
Germany in 1870, King Victor Emmanuel of Italy took Rome, and thus
completed the unification of the peninsula. Besides a guaranteed annual
income, the king also granted the pope three palaces that would be
considered an independent territory: the Vatican, the Lateran, and Castel
Gandolfo. But Pius IX refused, and the following years brought continued
tension between the Vatican and the Italian government. It was only in 1929
that the papacy finally agreed to the loss of its extensive holdings and to an
arrangement similar to what Victor Emmanuel had suggested.
   While these events were taking place in Italy, the dominant figure in
Germany was Otto von Bismarck, who had become chancellor of Prussia in
1862. His great achievement consisted of excluding Austria from the
German Confederation, and then molding that Confederation into a single
nation. After ten years of skilled diplomacy and military conquests,
culminating in the war with France of 1870–1871, Germany was united
under Wilhelm of Prussia. Bismarck’s religious policy was directed against
Roman Catholicism. That was the religion of the majority in Austria, and
therefore the Prussian chancellor feared that Catholics in his own territories
would sympathize with the Austrians. Also, his international policy
required that he support the unification of Italy—which Austria opposed—
and he therefore was greatly inconvenienced by Catholics under his rule
who insisted that Prussia should intervene to restore the papal lands to the
pope. But, above all, he was convinced that Catholicism was obscurantist,
and that liberal Protestantism was better suited to the great historical
mission that Germany would soon fulfill. For these and other reasons,
Bismarck took several measures against Catholicism. Germany broke
diplomatic relations with the papacy, several monastic orders were expelled
from the country, and the traditional subsidies given to the church were cut.
In 1880, for reasons of political expediency, Bismarck changed some of
these policies and reestablished relations with the papacy. But the preceding
conflicts were among the factors that convinced Pius IX—who served from
1846 to 1878—that there was an unavoidable opposition between the
Catholic Church and the modern idea of the state—an issue we shall
explore in Chapter 32.
   Besides the theological developments and the missionary enterprise that
we shall discuss in Chapters 31 and 33, the most significant developments
in European Protestantism during the nineteenth century were those derived
from the growing separation between church and state. After the
Reformation of the sixteenth century, in those countries where
Protestantism gained the upper hand, the new church continued relating to
the state in the same manner as had the Catholic Church. After the French
Revolution, however, this state of affairs began to change. In the
Netherlands, for instance, the union between the state and the Reformed
Church was broken when the French conquered the land and created the
Batavian Republic, and after the Restoration the links between church and
state never returned to their previous strength. In Germany, the quest for
national unity led to the abrogation of many old laws that sought to enforce
religious uniformity. Throughout Europe, political and economic liberalism
had similar consequences. This in turn contributed to the growth of what
were called free churches—that is, those to which one belongs by choice
and supports by means of offerings, in contrast to the state churches,
supported by state funds. The Methodists and Baptists spread throughout
Germany and northern Europe. And, even in the government-related
Lutheran and Reformed churches, Pietism made headway. Pietism led to the
formation of several missionary societies, and of others whose purpose was
to address the ills of Europe itself. In Germany and other northern lands,
deaconesses and their organizations did much for the well being of the sick,
the elderly, and the poor. In Denmark, Lutheran leader N.F.S. Grundtvig
sought to respond to the plight of the rural poor by advocating
cooperativism. In general, the lack of state support renewed the zeal of
many Protestants in Europe, drawing great numbers to the various aspects
of the churches’ work.

                 DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN
Throughout the nineteenth century, Great Britain followed a course parallel
to that of continental Europe. The Industrial Revolution also had an impact
there, but much earlier and to an even greater degree than elsewhere. That
revolution benefitted the middle class and the capitalists, while
undermining both the ancient aristocracy and the poor. The rapid growth of
cities that resulted from industry and increased trade gave rise to
overcrowded slums, and the poor found themselves living and working in
conditions of misery and exploitation. Meanwhile, economic and political
liberalism made great strides, thus increasing the power of the House of
Commons at the expense of the House of Lords. One result of these
conditions was a vast wave of migration to the United States, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. Another was the labor
movement, which made enormous progress between the beginning of the
century (when unions were forbidden by law) and the end of the century
(when the Labor Party was a political power). It was also in England that
Karl Marx developed many of his economic theories.
    All this also influenced the church. At the beginning of the French
Revolution, in the Church of England there were many of the evils that had
once characterized the worst times of the medieval church: absenteeism,
pluralism, and the use of ecclesiastical office as a means to further personal
and dynastic ambitions. But during the nineteenth century there was a
significant renewal in the Church of England. Aided by a number of reform
decrees issued by the government, those who sought a more faithful church
came to the foreground. Some of these people of reforming zeal belonged to
the Evangelical wing of Anglicanism, a group that was profoundly
influenced by the Pietism of the Continent and wished to see the Church of
England more closely aligned with the rest of Protestantism. Others,
particularly those of the Oxford movement, took the opposite tack and came
to be known as Anglo-Catholics. In many ways influenced by Romanticism,
and often looking to Eastern Orthodoxy for inspiration, the Oxford
movement emphasized the authority of tradition, apostolic succession, and
communion as the center of Christian worship. One of its leaders, John
Henry Newman, was converted to Catholicism, and eventually was made a
cardinal—although conservative Catholics never quite trusted him. But
most of the members of the movement remained within the Church of
England, and gave that church a renewed devotional life. Another result of
the movement was the rebirth of monasticism within the Church of
England, and soon Anglican monks and nuns were trying to meet the needs
of the poor and the ill.
    However, it was among dissident churches where the most vitality was
found during the nineteenth century. The growth of the middle class
brought about an upsurge in the membership of dissident churches.
Methodists, Baptists, and Congregationalists showed many signs of vigor,
not only in their numerical growth, but also in the many societies that they
founded to help the needy, to remedy some of the more blatant social ills,
and to take the gospel to the rest of the world. In order to reach the poor and
uneducated masses, dissident churches founded Sunday Schools, and these
eventually became a common practice among Protestants. Others organized
the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) and the Young Women’s
Christian Association (YWCA). Also, a number of new denominations
were born—particularly the Salvation Army, founded in 1864 as a means to
reach the impoverished and unchurched urban masses.
    All these groups, as well as the evangelical wing of Anglicanism,
showed great concern for the social ills of the time. The support and
inspiration of Methodists, Quakers, and others were important factors in the
birth of labor unions, in prison reform, and in legislation regarding child
labor. But the most significant accomplishment of British Christians during
the nineteenth century was the abolition of slavery in most of the Western
world. Years earlier, both Quakers and Methodists had condemned slavery.
But it was in the nineteenth century, thanks to the effort of William
Wilberforce and other committed Christians, that the British government
took measures against slavery. In 1806 and 1811, Parliament issued laws
forbidding the slave trade. In 1833, freedom was decreed for all slaves in
the British Caribbean, and similar laws were later issued for other British
colonies. At the same time, treaties were sought with other nations,
agreeing to end the slave trade. When such treaties were signed, the British
navy was given orders to enforce them. Within a short period of time, most
Western nations had abolished slavery.
  Protestants in England began several new forms of ministry, including these centers where the
                    homeless received both shelter and Christian instruction.

   In summary, the nineteenth century brought about great political and
economic changes in Europe. In general, Catholicism suffered more severe
blows from those changes than did Protestantism. Therefore, the nineteenth
century was for Catholicism a period of reaction against modern ideas,
which were usually seen as threats. For Protestantism, on the other hand,
the nineteenth century brought new opportunities. Protestant powers such as
Great Britain and Germany increased their influence in the world. Political
and economic liberalism were closely allied with Protestantism, and were
seen by their adherents as the wave of the future against an outdated and
authoritarian Catholicism. Protestants did take a leading role in the struggle
against social ills, most notably against slavery. The result was that, while
Roman Catholicism looked upon the new times with extreme caution (see
Chapter 32), many Protestants looked upon them with unwarranted
optimism (as we shall see in Chapter 31).
                                     29

    A Shifting Landscape: Latin America


   The successors of St. Peter have always been our fathers, but war had
   left us orphans, as a lamb calling in vain for its lost mother. Now the
   tender mother has sought him and returned him to the fold, and we
   are given shepherds worthy of the church and of the Republic.
                                                            SIMÓN BOLÍVAR


                     A PANOPLY OF NEW NATIONS
The political upheavals that had taken place in Europe and in the British
colonies of North America were also felt in Latin America early in the
nineteenth century. In the Spanish and Portuguese colonies there had long
been a tension between those recently arrived from Europe—the
peninsulares—and the native descendants of earlier immigrants—the
criollos. Through the exploitation of Indian and slave labor, the criollos had
become a relatively wealthy class who felt it understood the affairs of the
colonies better than the peninsulares, and that they therefore ought to have
a hand in running them. But appointments to all significant offices—both
civil and ecclesiastic—were made in Europe, and therefore such positions
were usually held by peninsulares, many of whom had never seen the lands
of the New World before they were appointed to rule them. The criollos—
conveniently setting aside the toil of Indians and black slaves—were
convinced that the wealth of the colonies was due to their efforts, and thus
resented the authority of the peninsulares. Although still faithful subjects of
the crown, they deplored the many laws that favored the metropolis at the
expense of the colonies. Since many of them had the necessary means, they
often traveled to Europe, from whence they returned imbued with the
republican ideas that were sweeping that continent. Thus, the criollos
played a role in Latin America similar to that of the bourgeoisie in France.
   In 1808, Napoleon deposed King Ferdinand VII of Spain, and in his
place crowned his own brother Joseph Bonaparte—whom the Spanish
dubbed Pepe Botella, or Joe Bottle. Spanish resistance to the usurper had its
headquarters at Cadiz, where a “junta” or board ruled in the name of the
deposed king. Napoleon declared that all Spanish colonies should now obey
King Joseph; but he did not have the power to enforce his authority, and
local juntas were organized in the New World. While the peninsulares
insisted that all such juntas should be under the Cadiz government, the
criollos preferred independent juntas, and their opinion prevailed. Thus, the
colonies began ruling themselves, although still in the name of the king.
Ferdinand VII was restored in 1814, after Napoleon’s defeat. But, instead of
showing gratitude for those who had preserved his territories for him, he set
out to undo all that the relatively liberal juntas had done. In Spain, he
abolished the constitution that the Cadiz junta had issued, and the reaction
was such that in 1820 he was forced to reinstate the constitution. Similar
policies in the colonies exacerbated criollo resentment against Spanish
policies, and soon those who had earlier proven faithful guardians of the
king’s inheritance rebelled against him. In the region often referred to as the
Río de la Plata—what is today Argentina, Paraguay, and Uruguay—the
junta simply continued governing the country, until independence was
proclaimed in 1816. Three years later, Paraguay declared its independence
from both Spain and the Río de la Plata. Uruguay broke away in 1828,
becoming an independent nation. Meanwhile, José de San Martin had
crossed the Andes and invaded Chile, whose independence was declared in
1818. While these events were taking place in the south, farther north
Simón Bolívar organized an army that defeated the Spanish and proclaimed
the independence of Greater Colombia—now Colombia, Venezuela, and
Panama. Then Ecuador joined Greater Colombia, and Bolívar marched to
the south, where Peru—which then included the territory that is now Peru
and Bolivia—was also made independent.
   Bolívar’s dream had been to create a vast republic embracing most of
the continent. But such dreams were soon shattered. Greater Colombia
broke up into Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador. In Peru, the region of
Alto Perú—high Peru—insisted on its independence, becoming the
Republic of Bolívar—now Bolivia. Bolívar’s last hopes for a continental
confederacy came to naught at the Panama Congress of 1826, where it
became clear that regional interests—as well as those of the United States—
precluded any close collaboration between the new nations. Five years later,
a few days before his death, Bolívar expressed his disappointment:
“America is ungovernable. Those who have served the revolution have
plowed the sea.”17




The nineteenth century brought the independence of most Spanish colonies in the New World, under
              the leadership of Bolívar and other members of the native aristocracy.

   In Mexico, events followed a different course. The criollos were
planning to grab power from the peninsulares when the conspiracy was
discovered, and one of its leaders, Father Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla,
decided to make a move before being arrested. On September 16, 1810, he
proclaimed Mexican independence, and soon found himself at the head of
an unorganized army of sixty thousand Indians and mestizos—persons of
mixed Indian and Spanish blood. After his capture and execution, Hidalgo
was succeeded by mestizo priest José María Morelos. Thus, from its very
beginnings the new nation had the support and participation of Indians and
mestizos. For a time, the criollos regained power; but later, under the
leadership of Benito Juárez, that situation was corrected. Therefore, the
Indian and mestizo populations have played important roles in the political
history of Mexico. Central America, originally part of Mexico, proclaimed
its independence in 1821, and later broke up into Guatemala, El Salvador,
Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. (Panama was not originally part of
Central America. It belonged to Colombia until 1903, when the United
States fostered its independence in order to evade the conditions that
Colombia required for the construction of the Panama Canal.) Brazilian
independence also resulted from the Napoleonic Wars. In 1807, fleeing
from Napoleon’s armies, the Portuguese court took refuge in Brazil. In
1816, João VI was restored to his throne in Lisbon but showed no
inclination to return to Portugal until forced to do so by political
circumstances in 1821. He left his son Pedro as regent of Brazil. Pedro later
refused to return to Portugal, proclaimed Brazilian independence, and was
crowned as Emperor Pedro I of Brazil. In 1825, Portugal recognized the
independence of its former colony. Pedro I, however, was not allowed to
rule as he wished, and was forced to agree to a parliamentary system of
government. In 1889, after the abdication of Pedro’s son Pedro II, the
republic was proclaimed.
    Haiti’s independence was the direct result of the French Revolution. As
soon as the French Revolution deprived the white population of military
support, the blacks, who were the vast majority, rebelled. Independence was
proclaimed in 1804, and it was acknowledged by France in 1825. The
United States refused to do so until 1862, because until that time slave-
holding states feared the example of a nation born out of a slave rebellion.
    Looking at all these events as a whole, several common threads appear.
Republican ideas from France and the United States provided the
ideological framework for revolution and independence in Latin America.
But those revolutions usually resulted in power residing in a criollo class—
or, in the case of Haiti, in military leaders—that paid little attention to the
needs of the masses. Vast tracts of land remained in the hands of just a few
landowners, while the majority of the population had no land. Toward the
middle of the nineteenth century, there was great economic development on
the basis of foreign capital and the exporting of agricultural products. This
in turn fostered even larger holdings of land, and created an alliance
between criollo landowners and foreign capital. In the cities, there also
appeared an urban middle class made up of merchants and government
employees who had little power, but whose interests were closely tied to the
sort of economic development that was taking place. What was hoped and
repeatedly promised was that the development of trade, industry, and
education would eventually benefit all social classes, for even the poorest
would receive a share of the wealth that was being created. But economic
progress required order, and thus dictatorships were often justified.
    Throughout the nineteenth century, the great ideological debate in Latin
America was between liberals and conservatives. In general, the leaders of
both groups belonged to the higher classes. But, while conservative strength
was based on the landed aristocracy, liberals found their support among the
merchants and intellectuals in the cities. Conservatives feared such notions
as freedom of thought and free enterprise. Liberals defended them, both
because they were more modern and because they were better suited to the
interests of the merchant class. While most conservatives looked to Spain
for inspiration, liberals looked to Great Britain, France, and the United
States. But neither group was willing to alter the social order so that the
lower classes could share in the wealth of the country. The result was a long
series of dictatorships (both liberal and conservative), of palace revolutions,
and of violent excesses. By the turn of the century, many tended to agree
with Bolívar: the continent was ungovernable. This view seemed to be
warranted by the Mexican Revolution, which began in 1910 and resulted in
a long period of violence and civil disorder that impoverished the country
and led many to emigrate.

               THE CHURCH IN THE NEW NATIONS
Throughout the colonial period, the church in Latin America had been
under Royal Patronage—Patronato Real. This included the virtual naming
of bishops by the governments of Spain and Portugal. Therefore, the
tensions between peninsulares and criollos were also felt in the church,
whose higher offices were in the hands of peninsulares, while criollos and
mestizos formed the bulk of the lower clergy. Although a few bishops
supported the cause of Spanish American Independence, most supported the
crown, many by means of pastoral letters in which they condemned the
rebellion. After independence, most of them had to return to Spain, thus
leaving many dioceses vacant. It was impossible to name replacements, for
Spain insisted on its ancient rights of Royal Patronage while the new
republics could not accept bishops who were named by the crown, and even
insisted on what they called a Patronato Nacional, claiming that, as heirs to
the rights of the Spanish crown, the new governments now had the right to
nominate their own bishops. The popes wavered in their attitude, for Spain
was still one of their main allies in Europe, but the new nations comprised a
substantial part of the Catholic flock. Pius VII, in his encyclical Etsi
longissimo (1816), spoke of the “grave evils of rebellion,” and of “our most
beloved son in Jesus Christ, Ferdinand, your Catholic king.” Eventually,
however, political reality forced him to take a neutral stance. In 1824, Leo
XI, in the encyclical Etsi iam diu, spoke of the movement for independence
as “tares,” and of Ferdinand as “our very beloved son Ferdinand, Catholic
king of the Spains.” In Europe, France, Austria, and Russia joined Spain in
opposing the acknowledgment of the new nations that would be implied in
naming bishops for them without consulting with Spain. Finally, in 1827,
Leo XII decided to name the first bishops for Colombia—which at the time
included what are now Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama. This
was the occasion for Bolívar’s words quoted at the beginning of this
chapter. But this did not put an end to the matter, for Ferdinand broke off
relations with Rome, and the pope had to undo much of what he had done.
It was only in the next decade that Gregory XVI officially acknowledged
the existence of the new republics, and named bishops for them. Given the
sacramental nature of Catholicism, the lack of bishops meant much more
than the mere lack of leaders. Without bishops there could be no
ordinations; and without sufficient ordained clergy, much of the sacramental
life of the church was interrupted.
    The attitude of the lower clergy, mostly criollos and mestizos, contrasted
with that of the bishops. In Mexico, three out of four priests supported the
rebellion. Sixteen out of the twenty-nine signatories of the Declaration of
Independence in Argentina were priests. Also, at the beginning of the
rebellion there was little popular support for independence, and parish
priests did much to gain that support. This ambivalent attitude of the church
was in many ways the continuation of the two faces that the church in Latin
America had shown from the earliest colonial period. While there were
those—particularly in the higher echelons of the hierarchy—who supported
generally conservative policies, there were also many who supported
political, economic, and social change.
   To complicate matters, it became increasingly evident that, regardless of
what the church taught officially, the people actually understood and
practiced their faith in a wide variety of ways. The lack of priests led to less
emphasis on the sacraments and more on religious observances and
celebrations that did not require the presence of a priest, such as saints’
days, the rosary, promises to the saints, written prayers with supposedly
magical powers, and so on. And all of this was combined with the survival
of many elements of the ancient religions of the original populations of the
Americas and of the slaves brought from Africa—and later with an esoteric
spiritism brought from Europe, which emphasized reincarnation and
communication with the spirits of the dead. While most of this was often
understood in purely religious terms, there is no doubt that much of it was
an act of resistance against the powerful who held sway over the church.
   Latin America after Independence For these reasons, the attitude of the new political leadership
toward Catholicism was complex. All called themselves Catholic, and the various early constitutions
 affirmed that Roman Catholicism was the national religion. But tensions with Rome were such that
 some—particularly in Mexico—proposed breaking with Rome and creating national churches. Such
  projects reappeared again and again in later years, whenever the popes seemed inclined to oppose
                                 the political interests of a nation.

    After independence, the conflict between liberals and conservatives was
also reflected in their divergent religious policies. While conservatives
wished to continue the ancient privileges of the clergy and the church,
liberals opposed many of them. It was then that many native clergymen
who had earlier supported independence joined the conservative ranks. The
early liberals did not oppose Catholicism as such, but only what they took
to be the narrow ideas and practices of a clergy that, while native born, still
viewed Spain as the center of the universe. But the constant conflicts
between liberals and the leadership of the church led to increased anti-
Catholic feelings within the liberal ranks.
    In the second half of the century, liberalism espoused the positivist
philosophy of Auguste Comte and therefore became more anti-Catholic.
Comte was a French philosopher, and one of the founders of modern
sociology who was convinced that society could and should be reorganized
following the dictates of reason. According to him, humanity has gone
through three stages of development: the theological, the metaphysical, and
the scientific or positive—for which reason his views were called
positivism. Although there are still enclaves of the earlier two stages, Comte
argued, we are now in the scientific age, and therefore society must be
radically reorganized on the basis of scientific or positive principles. The
resulting society will make a clear distinction between spiritual authority
and temporal power. The latter must be placed in the hands of the capitalists
and merchants, who best understand the needs of society. As to spiritual
authority, this could well be placed on a new Catholic Church without a
supernatural God, and devoted to the religion of humanity. Such ideas
gained wide acceptance among the bourgeoisie in Latin America, especially
in Brazil, but also in countries such as Argentina and Chile, where ideas
from France had often been well received. The result was renewed conflict
between liberals and the church, while states became increasingly secular.
 This Methodist Church in Mexico City shows some of the consequences of the Mexican Revolution,
 which took possession of all religious buildings and then determined and regulated their use. As a
       result, the Methodists now meet in the inner courtyard of a formerly Catholic convent.

    In Mexico, these nineteenth-century trends culminated in the Mexican
Revolution of 1910. After wars with Texas (1835–1836) and the United
States (1846–1848), the liberal government headed by Benito Juárez put an
end to many of the traditional privileges of the Church—eliminating the
privileges of the clergy, who until then had been exempt from the
jurisdiction of civil courts; ordering the church to divest itself of all
property not directly related to its religious functions; and placing official
records of births, marriages, and deaths in secular hands. All of this was
then imbedded on the liberal Constitution of 1857. When the conservatives
appealed for help to Napoleon III, the French invaded the country and set
up Maximilian of Austria as its ruler (1864). This led to rebellion, and the
capture and execution of Maximilian in 1867. After more civil unrest, and
constant conflicts between liberals and democrats, Porfirio Díaz came to
power. The Porfiriato, as his rule came to be known, was marked by thirty-
four years of violent suppression of opposition, and of a rapprochement
between the church and the government, which relaxed the provisions of
the Constitution of 1857. By 1910, the repressive measures of the
government, and the constant impoverishment of the rural population, led to
revolution. Díaz was deposed in 1911, and the privileges of the church were
once again abrogated. But the conflict continued unabated for years, with
ever harsher anticlerical laws on the one hand, and more open political
resistance by the leaders of the church on the other. By 1926 the supporters
of the church led the Cristero revolution, in which more than thirty
thousand rebels and almost twice as many federal troops died. When it
became clear that neither party was able to suppress the other, a
compromise was reached in 1929.
    All over Latin America, the second half of the nineteenth century also
brought new waves of immigrants—mostly European throughout the
continent, but also Chinese to the Pacific coast. Such immigration was
necessary for the sort of development that the ruling bourgeoisie envisioned
for Latin America. Immigrants provided the labor necessary for industry
and commerce, and also served as a balance against the masses of Indians
and blacks. In any case, that wave of migration was of great importance for
the religious life of the continent. Many of those who hoped to immigrate
were Protestants, and therefore several countries felt obliged to grant
religious freedom, at first only to such immigrants, but eventually to all.
The most notable consequence of immigration, however, was the enormous
growth in the numbers of baptized Catholics for whom the church could
provide practically no ministry nor religious instruction. As a result, Latin
American Catholicism became more superficial. In great cities such as
Buenos Aires and São Paulo, most still called themselves Catholics but few
participated in the life of the church.
    For a long time, the Catholic hierarchy responded to all this with futile
attempts to return to the past. The more widespread the new ideas became,
the more vehemently the hierarchy condemned them. Eventually, many
Latin American Catholics came to see faith as something to be held
independently and even against the authority of the church. Therefore,
when Protestantism made its appearance, it found the fields ripe for harvest.
                                     30

           A Shifting Landscape: Eastern
                    Christianity


   The time has come, when the duty of all Christians in the world is to
   unite their efforts to fulfill the words of the prophet Isaiah “to change
   swords into ploughs and spears into sickles,” thus proving once more
   the viability and the permanent actuality of Christianity in the world.
                                       RUMANIAN PATRIARCH JUSTINIAN, 1960



One of the main issues confronted by all Christians in the twenty-first
century is how to live in the post-Constantinian era. What is meant by this
phrase is that the church can no longer count on the political support that it
enjoyed since the times of Constantine. As we have seen in the preceding
chapters, in a process beginning with the American and French
Revolutions, Western Christianity had to face the challenge of secular states
that, although not always hostile, tended to ignore it. For Eastern
Christianity, on the other hand, that process began when Constantinople fell
to the Turks in 1453. It was at that point that we left our narrative on the
course of Eastern Christianity, and to it we must now return.

                    BYZANTINE CHRISTIANITY
The support that Christianity had traditionally received from the Byzantine
Empire was not an unmixed blessing. It is true that its relation to the empire
gave the Greek Church great prestige, but it is also true that its freedom was
greatly limited. While in the West popes were often more powerful than
kings and even emperors, in the East the emperors ruled the church, and
patriarchs who did not do their bidding were easily deposed and replaced.
When the emperor decided that reunion with Rome was necessary in order
to save his empire, that reunion was achieved even against the clear wishes
of the vast majority of the Byzantine Church. A year later, in 1453,
Constantinople fell to the Turks, and many Byzantine Christians interpreted
this event as an act of liberation from a tyrannical emperor who had forced
them into a union with heretical Rome.
    At first, the Ottoman regime granted a measure of freedom to the
church. Mohammed II, conqueror of Constantinople, invited the bishops to
elect a new patriarch—the former one had fled to Rome—to whom he
granted both civil and ecclesiastical authority over Christians in his
territories. In Constantinople itself, half the churches were turned into
mosques, but in the other half Christian worship continued with full
tolerance from the state. In 1516, the Ottomans conquered Syria and
Palestine, and Christians there were also placed under the government of
the patriarch of Constantinople. A year later, when Egypt fell to the Turks,
the patriarch of Alexandria was given special powers over Christians in
Egypt. Although this policy made the patriarchs virtual rulers of a Christian
state within the much larger Turkish state, it also meant that a patriarch who
did not implement the sultan’s policies was soon deposed.
    For several centuries, theological activity in the Greek-speaking church
was dominated by Western influences and reactions against it. The issues
debated in the West during the Protestant Reformation were also discussed
in the Greek-speaking church. In 1629, Cyril Lucaris, patriarch of
Constantinople, published a Confession of Faith that was Protestant in
many ways. Although Lucaris was deposed and murdered, his memory was
venerated by many—some claiming that the Confession of Faith was
spurious. Eventually, in 1672, a synod condemned him “if indeed he was a
Calvinist heretic.” By the next century, however, the issue was no longer
Protestantism; rather, it was Western philosophy and science, and the
impact they ought to have on Orthodox theology. In the nineteenth century,
when Greece became independent of Turkey, this issue took on political
overtones. In general, Greek nationalism sided with those who advocated
the introduction of Western methods of research and scholarship—who also
argued that the Greek Church, existing now in an independent nation,
should be independent from the patriarch of Constantinople. The
conservatives, on the other hand, held that commonly received tradition
should guide scholarship, and that part of that tradition was subjection to
the patriarch of Constantinople, even though he was subject to the Turkish
sultan.
   During the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the Ottoman Empire
broke down, and national Orthodox churches were formed, not only in
Greece but also in Serbia, Bulgaria, and Rumania. In each of these areas,
the tension between nationalist sentiments and the transnational nature of
Orthodoxy was a dominant issue. In the period between the two world wars,
the patriarchate of Constantinople recognized the autonomy of the various
Orthodox churches, not only in the former Turkish territories in the
Balkans, but also in other parts of Europe, such as Estonia, Latvia, and
Czechoslovakia. Since most of these territories fell under Russian
hegemony after World War II, Soviet religious policies were generally
applied in them.
   Early in the twentieth century, the ancient patriarchates of Jerusalem,
Alexandria, and Antioch found themselves under Arab rule. At first, these
newly formed Arab states existed under the shadow of Western powers. At
that time, significant numbers of Christians under those patriarchates
became either Catholic or Protestant. Then growing Arab nationalism
reacted against Western power and influence, and the growth of both
Protestantism and Catholicism was curbed. By the second half of the
twentieth century, the only nations where Orthodox Christianity could still
count on something like the traditional union of church and state were
Greece and Cyprus—the latter of which declared independence in 1960,
and whose official religion is the Cypriot Orthodox Church.
   In spite of the difficulties they suffered, the various Orthodox churches
that had formerly been under the patriarchate of Constantinople and now
found themselves under Soviet rule did show signs of vitality. For a time it
was feared that the loss of church schools, and the pressure of government
propaganda, would keep newer generations away from the church. But the
experience of several decades seemed to indicate that the liturgy,
traditionally the source of spiritual strength for Orthodox believers, was
equal to the task of transmitting the Christian tradition even in the midst of
hostile states—an indication that would prove true late into the twentieth
century, after the fall of Russian Communism. Although the civil
disabilities under which Christians were placed in several of these states at
various times indeed resulted in a decline in active church participation on
the part of those involved in the job market, it was significant that after
retirement vast numbers returned to the church.

                         THE RUSSIAN CHURCH
The fall of Constantinople in 1453 was interpreted by many in Russia as
God’s punishment for its having agreed to reunion with heretical Rome.
Eventually, the theory developed that just as Constantinople had replaced
Rome as the “second Rome,” now Moscow was the “third Rome,” the new
imperial city whose providential task was to uphold orthodoxy. In 1547,
Ivan IV of Russia took the title of “czar” or emperor, by which he meant
that he was the successor of the ancient caesars of Rome and
Constantinople. Likewise, in 1598, the metropolitan of Moscow took the
title of patriarch. To support this self-understanding, the Russian church
produced an array of polemical writings against Greeks, Catholics, and
Protestants. By the seventeenth century, these notions were so entrenched
that an attempt at rapprochement with the Greeks led to schism in Russia.
    Czar Alexis I Mikhailovich (1645–1676) saw this rapprochement with
Greek Christians as a preliminary step to the conquest of Constantinople,
and therefore encouraged Patriarch Nikon to revise the liturgy in order to
bring it into agreement with Greek practices. But many in Russia,
particularly among the lower classes, reacted violently. They were
suspicious of everything foreign, particularly since it appeared that it was
the aristocracy that was interested in promoting the new ideas. The result
was the schism of the Old Believers, some of whom then joined the
peasants in rebellion. This was crushed with great bloodshed, and the
peasants’ serfdom worsened. The Old Believers continued to exist, although
they split over a number of issues—particularly whether to accept priests
coming to them from the Orthodox Church, or not to have priests at all.
Some were drawn to apocalyptic extremes, and thousands committed
suicide as proof of their faith. Eventually, however, the more extreme
groups disappeared, and the Old Believers lived on as a minority group
within Russia at least until the twenty-first century.
    Czar Peter the Great (1689–1725) took a different tack. He was not
interested in a rapprochement with Greek Christians, but rather in opening
his country to Western influences. In the life of the church, this led to
increased interest in both Catholic and Protestant theology. Those who
followed these conflicting schools of thought did not generally abandon
their Orthodox faith. Rather, they sought to develop an Orthodox theology
using either Catholic or Protestant methodologies. On matters that were
open to debate, some followed the Catholic lead, while others took their cue
from Protestantism. The Kievan school, whose great figure was Peter
Mogila, was associated with Catholic tendencies; while Theophanes
Prokopovick and his followers felt that the Protestant critique of tradition
ought to be heeded by Russian Orthodoxy. Early in the nineteenth century,
the influence of the Enlightenment and of Romanticism gave the
Prokopovickians the upper hand. But later in the century there was a
nationalist reaction, with greater emphasis on the value of the traditionally
Russian—the Slavophile movement. The principal figure of this movement
was lay theologian Alexis Khomiakov (1804–1860), who applied Hegelian
categories to show that the true Orthodox understanding of catholicity—
sobornost—is a perfect synthesis of the Catholic thesis of the authority of
the Church and the Protestant antithesis of the freedom of the gospel.
    The Russian Revolution put an end to much of this debate. A different
Western philosophy, Marxism, had gained the upper hand. In 1918, the
church was officially separated from the state—and this was later ratified
by the constitution of 1936, which guaranteed both “freedom for religious
worship” and “freedom for anti-religious propaganda.” In 1920, religious
teaching in schools was outlawed. Two years earlier, all seminaries were
closed. After the death of Patriarch Tikhon in 1925, the Russian Orthodox
Church was not allowed to elect his successor until 1943. By then, partly as
a result of the war with Germany, in which it needed all possible support,
the government had decided to recognize the continued existence of the
church. That very year, seminaries were reopened. Also, permission was
granted for the printing of some books and periodicals, and for the
manufacture of items necessary for worship.
    As in the case of other Orthodox churches under communist rule, the
Russian church found its liturgy capable of supporting the faithful and
transmitting the traditions to new generations. Late in the twentieth century,
after almost seventy years of communist rule, the Orthodox in the Soviet
Union were still some 60 million strong.

                     OTHER EASTERN CHURCHES
Besides the churches discussed above, there are Orthodox bodies in various
parts of the world. Some of these, such as the Orthodox Church of Japan,
and those in China and Korea, were the result of the missionary work of the
Russian Church. They are fully indigenous, with a membership and clergy
that is mostly native, and they celebrate the liturgy in the native tongue of
each land. Others are the result of what has been called the Orthodox
Diaspora. For a number of reasons—political upheavals, persecution, the
search for better living conditions—large numbers of Orthodox moved to
areas distant from their ancestral homelands. Particularly in Western Europe
and the New World, there were significant numbers of Russians, Greeks,
and others for whom their faith and its liturgy were a means of keeping
alive traditions and values that would otherwise be lost. Relations among
these various bodies posed difficult problems for Orthodoxy, which has
always held that there can be no more than one Orthodox church in a given
place or area. On occasion, this put great stress on the bonds of unity within
the Orthodox Communion. One example of these difficulties took place in
the United States in the twentieth century, when the Russian Orthodox
Church granted autocephaly—autonomy—to its American counterpart,
raising protests from the patriarch of Constantinople and several leaders of
various other Orthodox communities in the United States, and eventually
giving rise to a number of conversations seeking to create a unified
Orthodox Church in the United States.
    But not all Eastern churches form part of the Orthodox Communion.
Since the time of the Christological controversies in the fifth century, a
number of Eastern churches that disagreed with the decisions of the
councils had established an independent existence. In the former territories
of the Persian Empire, the majority of Christians refused to call Mary
Mother of God, and therefore they were dubbed Nestorians. These
Christians—also known as Assyrian—have a long and checkered history.
Although for a time in the Middle Ages this church had numerous
members, and its missions extended into China, in more recent times it has
suffered severe persecution, particularly from its Muslim neighbors. Early
in the twentieth century, and again early in the twenty-first, such
persecutions decimated its members. Many of the survivors fled to the
Western hemisphere—including its head—the catholicos—who sought
refuge first in Cyprus and then in Chicago, where his successor still resided
in the twenty-first century. At that time, their total membership was
approximately a hundred thousand believers, mostly in Iraq, Iran, Syria, and
the United States.
    Those churches that refused to accept the Chalcedonian Definition of
Faith because it seemed to divide the humanity of Jesus from his divinity
are usually called Monophysites, although such a name does not accurately
describe their Christological understanding. The largest of these bodies
were the Coptic Church of Egypt and its daughter church, the Church of
Ethiopia. The latter was one of the last Eastern churches to receive the
active support of the state; but such support ended with the overthrow of
Emperor Haile Selassie in 1974. The ancient Syrian Monophysite Church,
also known as Jacobite, continued to be strong in Syria and Iraq. Its head,
the Jacobite patriarch of Antioch, resided in Damascus, the capital of Syria.
Technically under this patriarch, but in reality autonomous, the Syrian
Church in India, which claimed to have been founded by St. Thomas, was
fully indigenous, and had about half a million members.
    As noted earlier, the Armenian Church refused to accept the
Chalcedonian Definition of Faith, mostly because it resented the lack of
support from the Roman Empire when the Persians invaded Armenia. Their
territory was conquered by the Turks, and their staunch refusal to abandon
the faith of their ancestors was one of several causes of enmity between
them and their Turkish masters. As the power of the Ottoman Empire
waned, that enmity turned to violence. In 1895, and again in 1896 and 1914,
thousands of Armenians living under Turkish rule were massacred.
Approximately a million managed to escape and, as a result, by the twenty-
first century there were significant numbers of Armenian Christians in
Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Greece, France, and the Western
hemisphere—many of these demanding that Turkey acknowledge a
genocide that official Turkish history denied. In that portion of Armenia
that was now under Soviet control, the church continued an existence
similar to that of other churches under Soviet rule.
    In the early decades of the twentieth century, the participation of the
Eastern churches in the ecumenical movement was rather reserved. They
feared that a willingness to discuss issues of “faith and order” would be
construed as uncertainty as to their own beliefs, or as a willingness to
compromise such beliefs. Therefore, although several of them collaborated
with other Christians in practical matters, they refused any official
participation in discussions that could be interpreted as attempting to settle
matters of faith by negotiation. When the invitation was sent out for
churches to attend the First Assembly of the World Council of Churches, to
take place in Amsterdam in 1948 (see Chapter 33), most of the Orthodox
churches conferred among themselves and decided to abstain. In 1950, the
Central Committee of the World Council of Churches issued a statement
that allayed most of the misgivings of the Orthodox. After that time, most
of the Orthodox churches became full members of the World Council of
Churches. Likewise, the participation of other Eastern bodies also
increased. In this particular context, largely through the agency of the World
Council of Churches, there were significant conversations between those
churches that accepted the Definition of Faith of Chalcedon and those that
rejected it—Nestorians and Monophysites. In these conversations, it was
found that there was profound agreement among these various bodies, and
that many of their disagreements were the result of misunderstandings.
Thus, while opening the dialogue between Western and Eastern
Christianity, the ecumenical movement also promoted a valuable dialogue
among Eastern Christians.

       FURTHER SHIFTS: THE FALL OF THE SOVIET UNION
The fall of the Soviet Union brought enormous changes to the Orthodox
churches in the area. Mikhail Gorbachev’s policy of perestroika, which was
one of the first signs of a new era in the Soviet Union, included greater
freedom for the church, and the world was surprised that, after more than
eight decades in which the government sought to suppress it, Christianity
still showed enormous force. In 1989 alone, more than a thousand new
Orthodox communities emerged, a seminary opened in Siberia, and another
in Belarus (White Russia), and several monasteries that had been closed by
the government reopened. The next year Patriarch Pimen, noted for his
conservatism and readiness to submit to the government, died. His
successor, Patriarch Aleksey II (who, unlike his predecessors, was elected
by secret ballot) proved to be a firm defender of democracy, and made a
clear distinction between Christianity and Russian nationalism. In 1993, the
Orthodox University of Moscow was founded. Similar events took place in
several countries in Eastern Europe that now were no longer under Russian
rule, such as the Ukraine, Estonia, and others. There was no doubt that
Orthodox Christianity had emerged from Soviet rule with great signs of
vitality.
    But not all was rosy. In Russia the Orthodox Church now had to deal
with the presence of other Christian communities, and protested vigorously
when the pope named Roman Catholic bishops for Moscow and other
Russian cities. Several Uniate bodies that had been generally suppressed
under Communist rule, and even forced to be part of the official Orthodox
Church, now came to the foreground, claiming the properties they had lost
to official Orthodoxy. This was particularly true in the Ukraine, where
conflicts became violent. In 1996, in Estonia, the government granted
official and sole recognition to the Estonian Orthodox Apostolic Church,
many of whose leaders had been in exile in Sweden during Soviet rule, and
which the patriarch of Constantinople (Istanbul) decreed was an
autonomous church under his authority. To this Aleksey II and the Russian
Orthodox Church responded by temporarily suspending communion
between its patriarchate in Moscow and its counterpart in Constantinople.
    Similar events took place as various countries formerly held together by
Communist rule now broke apart. This was particularly true in Yugoslavia,
where civil war ensued and—even though Patriarch Pavle of Serbia called
for an end to violence—religious conflicts among Muslims, Orthodox, and
Catholics led to gross violations of human rights and crimes against
humanity. In Albania and in some other areas formerly under Communist
rule where the majority was Muslim, Orthodox leaders protested that the
new governments placed undue restrictions on them and their followers.
    Even outside the former Soviet Union, there were conflicts among the
Orthodox, as that tradition sought to adapt to a new reality in which
migration made it difficult to have national churches as it had in previous
centuries. In the United States, Australia, Latin America, and other regions,
Eastern Orthodox immigrants and their descendants carried their faith with
them. Each particular group continued relating to the church of its
ancestors, so that there were now different Orthodox churches in the same
nation, each owing allegiance to a different patriarch or archbishop in its
country of origin, and all resulting in confusion and conflict as different
patriarchs and other prelates claimed authority over them.




St. Raphael of Brooklyn has become a symbol of Orthodox missionary efforts in the United States and
                                           elsewhere.

   As one looks at these various churches as a whole, two conclusions can
be drawn. The first is that, although following a different chronology, these
churches too had to find ways to live and serve in a radically shifting
landscape, very different from the Christendom in which some of them—
particularly the Russian Orthodox Church—had long existed. The other is
that    Western      Christians—particularly      Protestants—may        have
underestimated the power of liturgy and tradition, that allowed these
churches to continue their life, and even to flourish, in the most adverse of
circumstances. Thus, Eastern Orthodoxy would make an important
contribution to the liturgical renewal of the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries, and would prove attractive to Protestants seeking deeper roots in
Christian tradition.
    Both the shifting landscape and the vitality of the Orthodox liturgy and
sense of tradition may be seen in movements that began in the twentieth
century in regions of the world that were not traditionally Orthodox, to
carry the message of Orthodoxy to new areas and ethnic groups. Although
much of the geographic expansion of Eastern Orthodoxy was the result of
the migration of Russians, Greeks, and others, early in the twentieth century
among the Orthodox in the United States there were voices seeking to
expand Eastern Orthodoxy beyond its traditional geographic and ethnic
borders. A pioneer in these efforts was Lebanese-born Rafle Hawaweeny
(1860–1915), now known as St. Raphael of Brooklyn. Through a ministry
that included the founding of thirty parishes, St. Raphael began the
systematic expansion of Orthodoxy in the United States. In 1988, his efforts
bore noticeable fruit when the Evangelical Orthodox Church, which had
been founded by Evangelical Protestants—many of them members of the
Campus Crusade—joined the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese
of North America. It was also in that year that the Antiochian Church
founded its Department of Missions and Evangelism, whose goal was “to
make America Orthodox.”
                                    31

                    Protestant Theology


   The historical foundation of Christianity as built by rationalistic, by
   liberal, and by modern theology no longer exists; but this does not
   mean that Christianity has lost its historical foundation. . . . We
   modern theologians are too proud of our historical method, too proud
   of our historical Jesus, too confident in our belief in the spiritual
   gains which our historical theology can bring to the world.


ALBERT SCHWEITZER

The nineteenth century posed great intellectual challenges for Christianity.
While the response of Catholic authorities and theologians was usually to
condemn and reject modern ideas (see Chapter 32), many Protestants
sought ways to interpret their ancient faith in terms of the new frame of
mind. Therefore, although the challenges were common to both branches of
Western Christianity, we shall deal with the Protestant response in the
present chapter and with Catholic reactions in the next.

                 NEW CURRENTS OF THOUGHT
By the beginning of the nineteenth century, the Industrial Revolution had
reached most of Western Europe—and even some areas of the New World.
Its impact went far beyond economic matters, extending to the whole of
life. There were mass movements of people seeking employment in
industrial centers, or simply leaving lands now taken over by crops to be
used for industrial purposes. The traditional extended family—parents,
uncles, aunts, cousins—was weakened by those movements, and the
nuclear family had to bear a greater burden of responsibility in the
transmission of values and traditions. More people came to see their lives as
their private responsibility, and therefore individualism and preoccupation
with the self became a common theme in both philosophy and literature.
    The Industrial Revolution also contributed to the idea of progress.
Throughout most of history, people had thought that the old and tried ideas
and practices were better than most innovations. Even at the time of the
Renaissance and the Reformation, when many new ideas were introduced,
people sought to return to the ancient sources of religion, art, and
knowledge. But now people were no longer looking to the past but to the
future. Applied science had proven able to produce wealth and comfort that
did not exist previously. Future possibilities seemed to have no limit. The
leading classes of society viewed the problems created by the Industrial
Revolution as passing clouds. Applied technology would soon solve them,
and then all in society would benefit from the new order. Since most
intellectuals belonged to those leading classes, these ideas were echoed in
their teachings and writings. In a sense, even Darwin’s theory of evolution
was an expression of faith in progress, applied in this case to the natural
sciences. Not only humankind but all of nature, is progressing. Progress is
part of the structure of the universe. As is also the case with social progress,
this is not an easy advance, but a harsh struggle in which the fittest survive
and, in the very act of surviving, contribute to the progress of the entire
species. This is expressed in the title of Darwin’s book, published in 1859,
On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation
of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life.
    Since progress is such an important element in human life, and even in
the entire universe, the same must be true of history, for what is history but
the progress of the past? The nineteenth century became intensely aware of
the radical changes that had taken place in society through the centuries—
an awareness that was further prodded by increased contact with other
cultures, especially in Africa and the Pacific. Thus, the conclusion was
reached that humans had not always been as they are now, for their
intellectual and religious views have also evolved. We have already
mentioned Comte’s theory of a progressive movement from “theology” to
“metaphysics,” and finally to “science.” Such ideas were typical of the
nineteenth century. The result was a series of historical studies that cast
doubt on much of the traditional views of the past. These studies, applied to
Scripture and to early Christianity, produced results that many found
incompatible with faith.
    Others witnessed the high social price of the progress brought about by
the Industrial Revolution. Many Christians sought to respond to the needs
of particular groups. The Sunday school movement was an attempt to reach
those who no longer had much connection with the traditional means of
religious instruction. The Salvation Army, the YMCA, and many similar
movements sought to reach the urban masses and alleviate their misery. But
the problems and their solutions went far beyond the level of what any
charitable institution could do for the disinherited, and many began
considering the need for a radical change in the social order. If it was true
that there was progress, and that the structure of society had changed
through the centuries, why not try to produce further changes in that
structure? Comte, as mentioned earlier often considered one of the founders
of modern sociology, proposed precisely such a change—one that placed
society in the hands of capitalists and merchants. Such projects were
frequently put forth in the nineteenth century. Socialism, in its varying hues,
became a common theme of those preoccupied with existing social
conditions, including vast numbers of Christians. The failed revolutions of
1848 were partly the result of such ideas and projects.
    The socialist author who would eventually become most influential was
Karl Marx, whose Communist Manifesto was published in 1848. His system
went beyond the socialist utopias of the time, for it included an analysis of
history and society on the basis of what he called “dialectical materialism.”
A basic element of that analysis was the notion that ideas, no matter how
purely intellectual they might appear, have social and political functions.
The dominant class develops an ideology that passes for a purely rational
construct, but whose true function is to bolster the existing order. Religion
itself is part of that structure of support for the powerful—hence, the oft-
quoted dictum that religion is the “opiate of the people.” But, Marx
continued, history moves on, and its next step will be a vast revolution that
will lead first to the “dictatorship of the proletariat,” and eventually to a
classless society in which even the state will be superfluous—the true
Communist society. Although Marx’s views would pose a serious challenge
to Christians in the twentieth century, during the nineteenth they made
relatively little impact.
    Late in the nineteenth century, the work of Sigmund Freud posed new
challenges. After many years of study in various disciplines, Freud became
interested in the manner in which the human mind functions, especially at
the subconscious level. On the basis of years of observation, he came to the
conclusion that the psyche is moved, not only by that which it consciously
knows, but also by other factors that never emerge from the level of the
subconscious. This is particularly true of experiences and instincts that the
mind suppresses due to social pressure or for some other reason, but never
destroys. The instincts of sex and aggression, for instance, remain active no
matter how deeply we repress them. This opened new horizons for
psychology, but also for theology, which did not always know how to deal
with Freud’s insights.
    Although they lived in the nineteenth century, both Marx and Freud
made their greatest impact on the twentieth. But both serve as examples of
what was taking place during their time, when scientific reasoning began to
be applied beyond the natural sciences in an effort to understand both
society and the human mind. It is for this reason that the nineteenth century
gave birth to such disciplines as sociology, economics, anthropology, and
psychology. It was in the context of those developing disciplines that
theologians had to do their work.

                 SCHLEIERMACHER’S THEOLOGY
We have already seen that Kant’s work put an end to the facile rationalism
of the eighteenth century—or at least cast a shadow over it. If it is true that
pure reason reaches an impasse when applied to questions such as the
existence of God or life after death, what route can theology follow in
dealing with these and other questions of similar importance for religion? If
it is true that the structures of thought are in the mind, and do not
necessarily correspond to reality, how are we to speak of ultimate realities?
There were three possible ways to respond to such questions, and
theologians explored all three, as we shall see in this and the following two
sections of this chapter.
    The first option was to seek a locus for religion other than pure or
speculative reason. Kant himself did this in his Critique of Practical
Reason. He argued that it is wrong to think that religion is basically an
intellectual matter, for in fact religion is grounded, not in the intellect, but in
the ethical sense. Human beings are by nature moral, and on the basis of
that innate moral sense one can prove the existence of God, the soul, human
freedom, and life after death. In a way, Kant thus attempted to salvage
something of the Christian rationalism that his Critique of Pure Reason had
undermined, and to do this by placing religion in a locus other than pure
reason.
    Early in the nineteenth century, Friedrich Schleiermacher proposed a
similar solution, although he gave up the attempt to base religion on reason,
be it pure or practical. He was born and raised in the home of a Reformed
pastor of Moravian tendencies who placed his son’s education in the hands
of the Moravians. Although Schleiermacher was Reformed, Moravian
Pietism did leave its mark on his theology. In any case, young
Schleiermacher went through a period in which the pervading rationalism
of his time made it difficult for him to continue juggling several of the
traditional doctrines of Christianity. He was helped out of that situation by
Romanticism. That movement held that there was more to human beings
than cold reason, and gained many adepts among the younger generations
who felt that rationalism was dehumanizing. Making use of the insights of
the Romantics, Schleiermacher began to find his way out of the impasse
and doubt in which rationalism had left him. His first major work, Speeches
on Religion to the Cultured among Its Despisers (1799), was precisely an
attempt to show to an audience steeped in Romanticism that religion must
still occupy an important place in human life. His main argument was that
religion is not a form of knowledge, as both the rationalists and the
orthodox believed. Nor is it a system of morality, as Kant implied. Religion
is grounded neither in pure nor in practical or moral reason, but rather in
Gefühl—a German word that is best translated, although not quite
accurately, as feeling.
    The Speeches did not clarify the content of such feeling, and
Schleiermacher undertook that task in his more mature work, The Christian
Faith. There he clearly shows that this is not a sentimental feeling, nor a
passing emotion or a sudden experience, but is rather the profound
awareness of the existence of the One on whom all existence depends—
both ours and that of the world around us. Thus, it is not an undefined or
amorphous feeling, for its clear and specific content is our absolute
dependence on God. Such feeling is not based on rational faculties or on
moral sentiment, but it does have significant consequences in both rational
exposition and in ethical responsibility.
    This feeling of dependence takes a specific form in each religious
community. The purpose of religious bodies is to communicate to others
and to future generations their particular constitutive experiences, so that
they may share in the same feeling. Schleiermacher himself is interested in
the Protestant religious community, which is based on two fundamental
historical moments: Jesus and the impact he made on his first disciples, and
the Reformation of the sixteenth century.
    The function of theology is to explore and expound on the implications
of that feeling of dependence at three levels: the self, its relations with the
world, and its relations with God. Anything that cannot be shown to be
related to the feeling of dependence has no place in theology. Let us take,
for instance, the doctrine of creation. That doctrine is of paramount
importance to the feeling of absolute dependence, for it affirms that all
existence depends on God. To deny this would be to deny the dependence
that is central to Christian religious feeling. But this does not mean that we
have to affirm a particular mode of creation. The creation as told in Genesis
may or may not be historically accurate—Schleiermacher himself did not
think it was—but in any case this is not a proper matter for theological
inquiry, for it has nothing to do with the feeling of dependence. Even if the
stories of Moses were true, and had been revealed in some supernatural
way, “the particular pieces of information would never be articles of faith in
our sense of the phrase, for our feeling of absolute dependence does not
gain thereby a new content, a new form, or clearer definition.”18 And the
same is to be said about other questions such as the existence of angels, of
Satan, and so forth. For the same reason, the traditional distinction between
the natural and the supernatural should be set aside, not because it opposes
modern science, but rather because that distinction limits our feeling of
dependence to those events or places in which the supernatural is made
manifest. By thus insisting that religion is different from knowledge,
Schleiermacher could interpret the central doctrines of Christianity in such
a way that they did not contradict the findings of science.
    Schleiermacher’s influence was great. At a time when many believed
religion to be a matter of the past, people flocked to church when he
preached. But he had even more influence over later generations, which
appropriately called him the father of liberalism.

                               HEGEL’S SYSTEM
Another route that remained open after Kant’s critique was to agree with
him that the mind stamps its seal on all knowledge, but then, instead of
seeing this as proof of the limits of reason, to affirm that reason is reality
itself. Reason is not something that exists in our minds, and which we then
use in order to understand reality. Reason is reality, the only reality there is.
    Such was the route followed by G.W.F. Hegel (1770–1831). Hegel
began his intellectual career in the field of theology, but later decided that
theology was too narrow a field of inquiry, for it was necessary to try to
understand not only religion but the whole of reality. Reality must not be
seen as a disconnected series of things and events, but as a whole. He
proposed that this could be achieved by affirming the identity of reason and
reality. It is not simply a matter of reason being able to understand reality,
or of reality setting limits to reason. It is rather that reason is reality, and
that the only reality is reason. As he said, “What is rational exists, and what
exists is rational.”
    However, in speaking of reason Hegel does not refer to mere
understanding, nor to the conclusions of reasoning but to the process of
thinking itself. In thinking, we do not stand before a fixed idea in order to
study it. On the contrary, we pose an idea, examine it so as to surpass it or
deny it in favor of another, and finally reach a third idea that includes
whatever there was of value in the two previous ones. This process of
posing a thesis, questioning it by means of an antithesis, and finally
reaching a synthesis, is what Hegel calls “reason.” This is, therefore, a
dynamic reason, a movement that is constantly advancing. This reason,
however, does not exist exclusively in the human mind. The universal
reason—the Spirit, as Hegel sometimes calls it—is the whole of reality. All
that exists is that dialectic and dynamic thought of the Spirit.
    On that basis, Hegel built an impressive system that included the entirety
of history as the thought of the Spirit. The various religions, philosophical
systems, and social and political orders are moments in the Spirit’s
thoughts. In that thought, the past is never lost but is always surpassed and
included in a new synthesis. Thus, the present includes all the past, for it
sums it up, and all the future, for the future is the rational development of
the present.
    Hegel was convinced that Christianity was the “absolute religion.” This
does not mean that Christianity denies other religions, but rather that it is
their culmination—that it sums up the entire process of human religious
development. The central theme of religion is the relationship between God
and humanity. That relationship reaches its apex in the Christian doctrine of
the incarnation, in which the divine and the human are fully united. The
union of divine and human, which was implicit in earlier religions, is now
made explicit in the incarnation. Likewise, the doctrine of the Trinity is the
culmination of the idea of God, for it affirms the dynamic nature of ultimate
reality. The dialectic of the Trinity includes three movements. First of all,
God is the eternal idea, in itself and by itself, even apart from the
development of that rational reality that we call creation. This is the
Kingdom of the Father, which is simply God considered apart from any
other being. The Kingdom of the Son is what we usually call creation, that
is, the world as it exists in time and space, and its culmination is God’s
incarnation, which shows the ultimate identity between the divine and the
human. The Kingdom of the Spirit follows this union of the divine and the
human, and is made manifest in the presence of God in the community. All
this taken together is the Kingdom of God, which comes to historical
fruition in the moral life and in the order of the state—for Hegel had a lofty
notion of the state. The result of this, as Hegel saw it, was a philosophy
completely free of the narrowness of all dogmatic or partial systems.
    This far-reaching scheme of reality found many admirers. It was said
that finally humans were able to see reality as a whole. In order to bolster
the system, Hegel’s followers sought to show how various elements of
reality fit in the vast Hegelian scheme. It was in protest against the
popularity of Hegel’s system that the Danish philosopher and theologian
Søren Kierkegaard facetiously spoke of how all problems would be solved
“now that the System is complete; or if not, will be complete by next
Sunday.” But even among many who did not accept it, Hegel’s system
forced philosophers and theologians to take history seriously. After Hegel,
history would no longer be a secondary matter for those who were
concerned with eternal realities, but would be seen rather as the locus in
which eternal realities are known. This notion, which has helped later
theologians recover much of the biblical perspective, is part of the legacy of
Hegel and of the nineteenth century.

                          KIERKEGAARD’S WORK
Søren Aabye Kierkegaard (1813–1855) was one of the most interesting
figures of the nineteenth century. Born in a strict Danish Lutheran home
that left a deep imprint on him, Kierkegaard had an unhappy youth. His frail
and slightly twisted frame made him the object of mockery that he suffered
throughout his life. But he soon became convinced that his undeniable
intellectual gifts meant that he was called to a special mission, and that
before that call every other interest must give way. On that basis, he broke
his engagement to a woman whom he deeply loved. Marriage, he thought,
would have made him happy but would also have prevented him from being
the solitary knight of faith that he was called to be. Years later, he would
compare that painful decision with Abraham’s willingness to sacrifice
Isaac; and he would also declare that some of his books were written
“because of her.”
    Kant’s critique of rationalism left a third option, different from those
followed by Schleiermacher and Hegel: although reason is unable to
penetrate ultimate truth, faith can. Kant’s pure reason can neither prove nor
disprove the existence of God; but faith knows God directly. From this
perspective, the basis for Christianity is not its reasonableness, nor its place
of honor in a system such as Hegel’s, nor even a feeling of absolute
dependence. Christianity is a matter of faith—of faith in the God whose
revelation comes to us in the Scriptures and in Jesus Christ.
    But this is not all, for up to this point Kierkegaard has said no more than
what has always been said by those who seek in faith a hiding place against
the challenges of their time. That kind of “faith,” Kierkegaard would say, is
not really such; for true faith is never an easy matter, nor is it a means to a
tranquil life. On the contrary, faith is always a risk, an adventure that
requires the denial of oneself and of all the joys of the faithless. On that
basis, Kierkegaard lambasted one of the most famous preachers of his time,
declaring that it was ridiculous to speak of a person who had achieved
worldly goods by preaching Christianity as a “witness to the truth.” Along
the same lines, he offered a radical critique of the Danish society of this
time—although this is something that most students of Kierkegaard did not
emphasize until the twenty-first century.




  Kierkegaard was both a philosopher who had little use for the Hegelianism then in vogue and a
Christian of profound conviction who felt called to show the radical nature of Christian discipleship.

    For Kierkegaard, the greatest enemy of Christianity was Christendom,
the purpose of which is to simplify the matter of becoming a Christian. In
Christendom, one is a Christian by simply being neither Jew nor Muslim.
But in truth, those who understand Christianity in that fashion are mere
pagans. Such cheap Christianity, with neither cost nor pain, is like war
games, in which armies move and there is a great deal of noise, but no real
risk nor pain—and therefore no real victory. What we call Christianity is
simply playing at being Christians. And many preachers contribute to the
mockery of that game when they seek to make Christianity an easy thing.
This is the “crime of Christendom,” which plays at Christianity and “takes
God for a fool.” And the tragedy is that few realize how ridiculous it is to
speak of God in such terms.
    In response to the travesty and tragedy of Christendom, Kierkegaard
conceived his calling as “making Christianity difficult.” This did not mean
that he was to persuade people that Christian faith was wrong. Rather, it
meant that he must tell them that what had been preached and taught to
them was far from the true faith of Christianity. In other words, in order to
be truly Christian, one must become aware of the cost of faith and pay the
price. Without that, one may well be a member of Christendom but not a
Christian.
    True Christianity has to do with a person’s very existence and not merely
with the intellect. It is at this point that Kierkegaard feels compelled to
reject the illusions of “the System”—his sarcastic name for Hegel’s
philosophy. What Hegel and his followers have done is to build an
imposing edifice in which there is no place for true human existence—an
existence that takes place in anguish, doubt, and despair. They have built a
sumptuous mansion and decided to live in the barn, for their building is too
good for them. Existence—actual, painful, human existence—is prior to
essence, and much more important than it. This emphasis on existence
made Kierkegaard the founder of existentialism, although many later
existentialists pursued interests very different from his. Existence is a
constant struggle, a struggle to become, to be born. In placing existence at
the heart of matters, one is forced to abandon, not only Hegelianism, but
also every other system, and even all hope for a consistent system.
Although reality itself may be a system for God, it can never be seen as
such from the perspective of one in the midst of existence.
    Kierkegaard, however, was interested in a particular form of existence:
Christian existence. It too cannot be reduced to a system. The tragedy of
Christendom, of easy Christianity, is that existence has ceased to be an
adventure and a constant risk in the presence of God, and has become a
form of morality or a doctrinal system. Hence, Kierkegaard’s great problem,
which he sought to pose before all, was: how to become a true Christian
when one has the disadvantage of living in the midst of Christendom.

                   CHRISTIANITY AND HISTORY
The interest in history that characterized the nineteenth century also left its
mark on biblical and theological studies. In Tübingen, F.C. Baur (1792–
1860) sought to expound on the development of theology in the New
Testament following Hegel’s scheme. Baur and his followers felt that at the
very root of the New Testament one finds the conflict between Peter’s
Judaizing Christianity and the more universal perspective of Paul. The
tension between that thesis and antithesis was then resolved in a synthesis
that some said was the Fourth Gospel, and others said was second-century
Christianity. Baur’s basic scheme and its many variants, as well as the
general interest in history that existed at the time, led to long and scholarly
discussions regarding the date and authorship of each book of the Bible.
Many looked upon such debates, and their startling conclusions, as a
menace to faith. In any case, these debates led to increased refinement in
the tools of historical research, and to a better understanding of the Bible
and its times.
   The study of church history followed a parallel course. The idea that
Christian doctrines have in fact evolved through the centuries proved a
stumbling block to many. Some insisted that such evolution was only the
unfolding of what was already implicit in early Christianity. But others—
among them the leading historian Adolph von Harnack (1851–1930)—saw
the development of dogma as the progressive abandonment of the faith of
the early church, moving away from the teachings of Jesus to teachings
about Jesus. According to Harnack, Jesus taught the fatherhood of God,
universal brotherhood, the infinite value of the human soul, and the
commandment of love. It was later, through a process that took many years,
that Jesus and faith in him became the center of the Christian message.
   Many of these ideas were derived from one of the most influential
theologians of the nineteenth century, Albrecht Ritschl (1822–1889), whom
Harnack called “the last of the fathers of the church.” Like Schleiermacher,
Ritschl responded to Kant’s challenge by placing religion in a sphere
distinct from pure or cognitive reason. But he thought that Schleiermacher’s
“feeling of absolute dependence” was too subjective. For him, religion—
and Christianity in particular—was neither a matter of rational knowledge
nor of subjective feeling but of practical life. Speculative rationalism he
regarded as too cold, not requiring a commitment of faith. Mysticism, on
the other hand, he rejected as being too subjective and individualistic.
Christianity is practical in that it is lived out in the practical, moral life.
    But Christianity is practical also in the sense that it must be based on a
factual knowledge of events—particularly of the event of Jesus. What is of
primary importance for the practical life is God’s historical revelation in
Jesus. When theology forgets this, it falls into either rationalism or
mysticism. Against both errors, historical study shows that the center of the
teachings of Jesus is the Kingdom of God and its ethics, “the organization
of humanity through action based on love.” Thus, the role of the community
in Christianity must not be denied by an individualistic understanding of the
faith. It was this aspect of Ritschl’s theology that served as the basis for
Rauschenbusch’s Social Gospel.
    The interest in history in the nineteenth century led to the “quest for the
historical Jesus.” In order to know the true essence of Christianity, it was
thought, one must find the factual Jesus hidden behind the faith of the
church and even behind the accounts of the gospels. The difficulty in such a
quest, however, is that the historian’s own values and image of reality are
superimposed on any findings. Therefore, by the beginning of the twentieth
century the famous theologian, musician, and missionary Albert Schweitzer
concluded that the quest had looked for a man of the nineteenth century, and
instead of finding Jesus had found its own image.
    The theologians mentioned in this chapter are only a few of many
worthy of study, for the nineteenth century was marked by a theological
activity rivaled by few other periods. But the few mentioned suffice to give
you an idea of the great variety of opinions and positions that appeared
within Protestantism, and the intellectual vitality reflected in that very
variety. Naturally, in that feverish intellectual activity, statements were
made and positions taken that would soon require correction. But the
undeniable fact is that the nineteenth century proved that there were in the
Protestant ranks many who did not fear the intellectual challenges of their
time.
                                    32

     Catholicism in the Face of Modernity


   We are horrified, venerable brethren, at seeing the monstrous
   doctrines, or rather the enormous errors, that oppress us. They are
   widely distributed by a multitude of books, pamphlets, and other
   writings small in size, but great in their evil.


GREGORY XVI

While many Protestant theologians followed the route of liberalism, the
Catholic hierarchy tried to keep its theologians from following suit. The
main reason for this was the manner in which the new ideas had threatened
and damaged the authority of the church.

          THE PAPACY AND THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
The pope at the outset of the French Revolution was Pius VI. Years earlier,
in 1775, he had begun his pontificate by issuing a bull in which he attacked
the ideas of those philosophers who advocated a new social and political
order. Therefore, from the very early days of the revolution, the pope did all
he could to impede its progress. By the time the new French government
issued the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, the tension with Rome was such
that negotiations were almost impossible. In retaliation for the pope’s
support of conservatism, the French republican government sought to
weaken the papacy, and this was one of the reasons for the birth of the cult
of Reason. In Rome itself, French agents undermined the pope’s authority
by disseminating republican ideas. In 1798, the French army took Rome,
proclaimed a republic, and declared that the pope was no longer the
temporal ruler of the city. Pius VI died a year later, while virtually a
prisoner of the French.
    The cardinals then gathered in Venice under the protection of Emperor
Francis II of Austria, an enemy of the French Republic, and elected Pius
VII. Napoleon’s climb to power eased tensions between the new pope and
France, and in 1801 an agreement was reached between the two parties.
Although Napoleon was not particularly religious, he saw no need to spend
his energies in conflicts with the papacy, and Pius VII, having been restored
to his see, enjoyed a few years of relative peace. In 1804, he traveled to
Paris in order to consecrate Napoleon as emperor—and Napoleon signaled
his claim to absolute power by taking the crown from the pope’s hand and
crowning himself. The following year, the emperor’s troops invaded Italy,
and in 1808 took the city of Rome. The pope refused to flee, and
excommunicated any who did violence to him or to the church. The French
took him captive and he was not freed until the fall of Napoleon. He then
returned to Rome, where his first official action was to forgive his enemies.
    Pius VII died in 1823, two years after Napoleon, and was succeeded by
Leo XII. Leo and his successors, Pius VIII and Gregory XVI, were able to
reign in peace. But because of the memory of the French Revolution they
were inclined toward political and theological conservatism, and they
repeatedly blocked attempts by Catholics to lend their support to republican
and democratic ideas. The most famous person thus condemned was the
French theologian F.R. de Lamennais, who had staunchly resisted Napoleon
in his attempts to use the church for his own ends. After a long spiritual
pilgrimage, Lamennais came to the conclusion that absolute monarchs
would always be tempted to use the church for their own ends, and that
therefore Christians ought to foster movements to limit the power of
monarchs. This should be done with the support and the direction of the
papacy. As part of this vast political project, the pope should advocate the
freedom of the press, for this would spearhead the new order. Lamennais
was convinced that if the popes took the lead in such a project, the church
would be able to claim its rightful place in the resultant order. Up to that
point, Lamennais had been a champion of the church against absolutist
governments that would not respect its prerogatives, and Leo XII had even
considered making him a cardinal. But when Lamennais began arguing for
an alliance between the popes and political liberalism, he lost all support in
Rome, where the memory of the French Revolution was still fresh. He went
to Rome, hoping to convince the pope of the wisdom of his plan. But
Gregory XVI, then pope, condemned his ideas in two encyclicals.
Lamennais then left the church, taking with him many others of similar
ideas.
    While this debate was taking place, nationalist sentiment was growing in
Italy. A significant faction among Italian patriots hoped that the papacy
would provide the center around which a new unified nation would be
formed. But the papal fear of anything associated with sedition, and the
popes’ willingness to please the very monarchs who sought to keep Italy
divided, soon lost the popes any support among Italian nationalists.

                                    PIUS IX
The longest pontificate in history, that of Pius IX (1846–1878), was a
paradoxical time for the papacy. The greatest of these paradoxes was that, at
the same time that the popes were declared infallible, they lost their
temporal power. The revolution of 1848 was felt in Rome, where the
Republic of Rome was proclaimed in the following year. The pope,
expelled from the city, was unable to return until the French intervened in
his favor. After his restoration, instead of continuing some of the measures
of reformation and liberalization introduced by the republicans, Pius IX
tried to rule as an absolute monarch. He also clashed with Camillo Benso,
conte di Cavour, the great statesman of the kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia,
whose goal was the unification of Italy. Eventually, on September 20, 1870,
the troops of the new kingdom of Italy took the Papal States. Although for a
long time the popes refused to accept the new reality, those events marked
the end of their temporal power, for their sovereignty was now limited to a
few palaces that Italy allowed them to keep, including the Vatican. At
approximately the same time, Bismarck in Germany was taking measures
against the power of the church, and other European powers were following
his example. Therefore, the pontificate of Pius IX marks the end of the
political power of the popes, which had reached its apex in the thirteenth
century under Innocent III.
    While losing his power, Pius IX insisted on reaffirming it, even if this
could be done only in religious matters. Thus, in 1854, he proclaimed the
dogma of the Immaculate Conception of Mary. According to that dogma,
Mary herself, by virtue of her election to be the Mother of the Savior, was
kept pure from all taint of sin, including original sin. This was a question
that Catholic theologians had debated for centuries without reaching a
consensus. But the most significant fact from a historical point of view was
that, in proclaiming this dogma as the doctrine of the church, Pius IX was
the first pope ever to define a dogma on his own, without the support of a
council. In a way, the bull Ineffabilis, promulgating the dogma of the
Immaculate Conception of Mary, tested the waters to see how the world
would react. Since the bull did not meet much opposition, the stage was set
for the promulgation of papal infallibility.
    Meanwhile, the pope did not rest in his struggle against the new political
ideas circulating in Europe and the Americas. In 1864, he issued the
encyclical Quanta cura, accompanied by a Syllabus of Errors that listed
eighty propositions that Catholics must reject. Some of the errors listed
there show the mood of the papacy in the nineteenth century:

         13. That the method and principles by which the ancient
   scholastic doctors developed their theology are not compatible with
   present needs or with scientific progress.
         15. That each person is free to adopt and follow that religion
   which, guided by the light of reason, he shall consider true.
         18. That Protestantism is simply another form of the same
   Christian religion, and that it is possible to please God in it as well as
   in the true Catholic Church.
         21. That the church does not have the power of defining
   dogmatically that the religion of the Catholic Church is the only true
   religion.
         24. That the church has no authority to make use of force, nor
   does it have temporal power. . . .
         30. That the immunity of the church and of ecclesiastics is based
   on civil law.
         37. That it is lawful to institute national churches, separate and
   completely independent of the Roman pontiff.
         38. That the arbitrary behavior of the popes contributed to the
   break between the Eastern and Western churches.
         45. That the entire management of the schools in which youth
   are educated in a Christian state, with the sole and partial exception
   of seminaries, can and should be in the hands of the civil power, in
   such a manner that no other authority be allowed to intervene in the
   management of schools, the direction of studies, the granting of
   degrees, or the selection and certification of teachers.
         47. That the good order of civil society requires that public
   schools, open to children of all classes, and in general all public
   institutions devoted to the teaching of literature and science, and to
   the education of youth, be free of all authority on the part of the
   church, of all its moderating influence, and be subject only to civil
   and political authority, so that they may behave according to the
   opinions of civil magistrates and to the common opinion of the time.
         55. That the church ought to be separate from the state, and the
   state from the church.
         77. That in our time it is no longer convenient that the Catholic
   religion be the only religion of the state, or that every other religion
   be excluded.
         78. That it is therefore praiseworthy that in some Catholic
   countries the law allows immigrants to practice publicly their own
   forms of worship.
         79. That it is false that, if all religions are granted civil freedom,
   and all are allowed to express publicly their opinions and ideas, no
   matter what they may be, this will facilitate moral and mental
   corruption, and will spread the plague of indifferentism.
         80. That the Roman pontiff can and should be reconciled with,
   and agree to, progress, liberalism, and modern civilization.

   Thus, during the last decades of the nineteenth century, the papacy was
openly opposed to such innovations as the separation of church and state,
freedom of worship, freedom of the press, and public schools under state
supervision. At the same time, the pope insisted on his authority, and on the
evils that would follow if he was not obeyed. All this reached its high point
in the First Vatican Council, still under the direction of Pius IX. In Pastor
aeternus, the Council promulgated the dogma of papal infallibility:

   Therefore faithfully adhering to the tradition received from the
   beginning of the Christian faith, for the glory of God our Saviour, the
   exaltation of the Christian religion, and the salvation of Christian
   people, the sacred Council approving, we teach and define that it is a
   dogma divinely revealed: that the Roman Pontiff, when he speaks ex
   cathedra, that is, when in discharge of the office of pastor and doctor
   of all Christians, by virtue of his supreme Apostolic authority, he
   defines a doctrine regarding faith or morals to be held by the
   universal Church, by the divine assistance promised to him in blessed
   Peter, is possessed of that divine infallibility with which the divine
   Redeemer willed that his Church should be endowed for defining
   doctrine regarding faith or morals; and that therefore such definitions
   are irreformable of themselves, and not from the consent of the
   Church.19

   This is the official statement of papal infallibility as the Catholic Church
holds it. It is important to note that the text does not say that the pope is
always infallible, but only when he speaks ex cathedra. These words were
included in the declaration in order to respond to the objection that Pope
Honorius, for instance, had been a heretic. The answer to that objection
would then be that Honorius, in accepting erroneous doctrine, did not do so
ex cathedra. In any case, of the more than six hundred bishops present, five
hundred and twenty-two voted in favor, two against, and more than a
hundred abstained. (Only once after this proclamation has a pope claimed to
be making use of such authority. This was in 1950, when Pius XII
promulgated the doctrine of the Assumption of Mary—that is, that at the
end of her earthly life Mary was bodily assumed into heaven.)
   The promulgation of papal infallibility did not cause the stir that might
have been expected. In the Netherlands, Austria, and Germany, some
withdrew from the Roman communion and founded the Old Catholic
Church. But in general, protests and criticism were moderate—having lost
its political power, the papacy was no longer as formidable as it had once
been. In the old struggle between Gallicans and Ultramontanes (see Chapter
18), the latter had finally won. But that victory was possible because the
papacy had lost much of the power that at an earlier time Gallicans had
feared. Papal infallibility was promulgated on July 18, 1870, and on
September 20 Rome surrendered before the armies of the kingdom of Italy.
Pius IX declared himself a prisoner of King Victor Emmanuel, and refused
to accept the new order. After all, Rome had been lost to the popes many
times before, and always someone had intervened to restore it to the papacy.
But this time no one intervened and, in 1929, Pope Pius XI finally accepted
what had been a fact for more than half a century.

                                   LEO XIII
Pius IX was succeeded by Leo XIII, whose tenure in office was also
exceptionally long (1878–1903). Given political conditions in Italy, Leo
XIII, who still insisted on his right to temporal authority over Rome and the
surrounding area, declared that Catholics should not vote in Italian
elections. That prohibition, which continued until well into the twentieth
century, would in effect deny Catholics the opportunity to participate in the
formative years of the Italian nation. But, while following that conservative
policy in Italy, Leo saw the need to yield in other areas. Thus, he was able
to reach a tacit agreement with Germany, with the result that some of the
anti-Catholic policies begun by Bismarck were rescinded. In France, the
Third Republic also took anticlerical measures, but the pope decided it was
best to follow a policy of conciliation. In 1892, he even advised the French
clergy to abandon their opposition to the republic—even though a few years
earlier, in the bull Immortale Dei, he had declared democracy incompatible
with the authority of the church. Thus, Leo XIII, while acknowledging the
need to take into account the new realities and attitudes of modern times,
understood papal authority in terms very similar to those of Pius IX, and
still kept alive the dream of a Catholic society guided by principles
formulated by the papacy.
    This may be seen in the most important document of Leo’s pontificate,
his bull Rerum novarum, issued on May 15, 1891. The subject of that bull
was one with which few popes had dealt before: the proper relations
between laborers and their employers. In the bull, Leo shows that he is
aware of the inequities that have resulted from the contrast between “the
enormous fortunes of a few individuals, and the extreme poverty of the
masses.” Therefore, he writes, the time has come “to define the mutual
rights and obligations of the rich and the poor, of capital and labor.” Such
relations have become all the more tragic since labor organizations have
disappeared in recent times, and “a small group of very rich people have
been able to throw upon the masses of poor laborers a yoke that is little
better than slavery itself.” Although it is an error to believe that between the
rich and the poor there can only be class war, it is true that the defense of
the poor merits special attention, for the rich have many ways to protect
themselves, while the poor have no other recourse than the protection of the
state. Therefore, laws should be such that the rights of the poor are
guaranteed. In particular, this refers to the right of every laborer to a salary
sufficient to sustain him and his family, without being forced to work
beyond a fair limit. All this is to be done because “God seems to lean in
favor of those who suffer misfortune.”
    On the other hand, this does not mean that the opinions of the socialists
are correct, for private property is a right established by God, as is also the
right of inheritance. Furthermore, the differences that exist in the social
order are due, at least in part, to natural differences among human beings.
What the pope then asks is, first of all, for the rich to practice charity. This
means that no one is under obligation to give to the point of cutting into
what is necessary for life, or even for maintaining one’s stature in life. But,
having met those needs, one is obliged to give the needy what is left. The
poor, for their part, ought not to hate the rich, but are rather to remember
that poverty is an honorable state, and that the practice of virtue leads to
material prosperity.
    Leo is well aware that charity and love will not suffice to produce
justice, and therefore he calls on all Christians to defend the poor, and urges
the formation of labor unions to defend the rights of laborers. Since those
rights include fair wages, reasonable hours of work, and the right to practice
the Catholic religion without interference, Leo calls for the formation of
Catholic labor unions, arguing that in such unions there will not be the
hatred and divisions that arise when poverty is unaccompanied by religion.
In summarizing its position, the bull declares: “The urgent issue of today is
the condition of the working classes. . . . But Christian laborers will easily
solve it by forming associations, choosing wise leaders, and following the
path that their ancestors have trod with so much profit to themselves and to
society.”
   This encyclical renewed the motivation among the many Catholics who
were already seeking solutions to the problems posed by the Industrial
Revolution and growing capitalism. Some whom the bull prodded into
action would later come to the conclusion that its solutions were too
simplistic. Others would oppose the union movement by pointing out that
Leo had encouraged Catholic unions, and not others. Therefore, while
Rerum novarum marks the beginning of the modern Catholic trade-union
movement, it is also an indication of Leo’s ambivalence before the
challenges and requirements of the modern world.
   A similar ambivalence could be seen in his attitude toward modern
scholarship. Leo did open the archives of the Vatican to historians, for he
was convinced that the outcome of historical studies would strengthen the
authority of the church. But his bull Providentissimus Deus, while admitting
the value of historical study of the Bible, warned against its use to weaken
the authority of either the Bible or the church. Therefore, both those who
sought greater freedom in the critical study of Scripture and those who
opposed them could point to sections in the encyclical that seemed to favor
them. Likewise, Leo promoted a return to the theology of Thomas Aquinas,
both creating a Leonine Commission to produce a critical edition of all the
writings of Aquinas, and ordering that those writings—and not just
commentaries on them—be the basis for theological instruction in
seminaries. While there was certainly an element of conservatism in such
measures, one should also note that Leo felt that Aquinas was particularly
valuable because he too was forced to face the challenges of a changing age
and new attitudes in the field of philosophy.

                                PIUS X
The pope who succeeded Leo, and who led the Catholic Church until the
beginning of World War I, was Pius X (1903–1914). His policy was much
more conservative than Leo’s, and drew its inspiration from Pius IX. The
result was a growing gulf between mainstream modern thought and society
on the one hand and Catholicism on the other. Following the pope’s
instructions, the Holy Office—the old Inquisition—issued a decree
condemning those who had dared apply the new methods of research to
Scripture or to theological matters. These were the so-called Modernists, of
whom the most famous were the Frenchman A.F. Loissy, the Englishman
George Tyrrell, and the German Hermann Schell. Shortly thereafter, in the
encyclical Pascendi Dominici gregis, Pius X confirmed the action of the
Holy Office. The net result was that many of the Modernists left the church,
while greater numbers of Catholics decided to remain in the church but pay
little attention to pontifical directives.

                      BENEDICT XV TO PIUS XII
World War I had just broken out when Pius X died and was succeeded by
Benedict XV (1914–1922). He had been made an archbishop by Pius X,
whose policies he was determined to continue. Like the previous three
popes, he insisted on his right to rule the papal states, which he claimed
Italy had usurped from the Holy See. He directed most of his early efforts to
the pursuit of peace; but he was repeatedly rebuffed by the belligerent
powers. When peace finally came, and the League of Nations was
established, he was not in a position to influence events in any decisive
way. After the war he was able to sign concordats with several of the new
states that resulted from the peace negotiations. In general, he was
perceived as more open than his predecessor, but was not a very effective
pope.
    His successor, Pius XI (1922–1939), was a scholar and an able
administrator. He was also acutely aware of the increasing importance of
the non-European world, and therefore did all within his power to
encourage missionary work and to help churches already established in
former mission areas attain maturity. During his pontificate the number of
Catholic missionaries doubled, and it was he who consecrated the first
Chinese bishops. As we shall see, later in the century this emphasis on the
development of Catholicism in other lands would bear significant and
unexpected fruit. In contrast to most of the popes of this period, Pius XI
was very interested in simple acts of piety and devotion, and therefore was
a great admirer of Thérèse of Lisieux (1873–1897), whose devotion had
been centered on the “little way” of obedience, and who had seen herself as
an “apostle to the apostles,” praying for priests and encouraging them in
their ministry. Showing his admiration for Thérèse, and his conviction that
her teachings were very much-needed by the church of his time, Pius XI
beatified her in 1923, and then canonized her two years later. In a way,
Thérèse was a symbol of Pius’s interest in increasing the activity of the
laity, although always under the supervision of the hierarchy. This he
outlined in the first of his encyclicals, which set the goals and rules for
Catholic Action, the most important Catholic lay organization of the first
half of the century.
    Although very concerned about the dangers of Communism and its
avowed atheistic stance, Pius XI did not manifest the same concern over
Fascism, particularly when it posed as Communism’s chief enemy.
Furthermore, Fascism appealed to the same principles that Pius IX had so
strongly advocated in his Syllabus of Errors: a hierarchical understanding
of society, a strong sense of authority, and a state dedicated to the
enforcement of moral standards. Since Italian Fascism in the early stages of
its development favored Catholicism, the pope was quite content to work
with it. In 1929, his representative signed an agreement with Mussolini that
finally resolved the issue of Italian sovereignty over Rome. Italy
acknowledged the existence of a sovereign state, Vatican City, and granted
the papacy sovereignty over it, as well as financial compensation for the
loss of other territories. In return, Pius recognized the kingdom of Italy as a
legitimate state, with Rome as its capital. Eventually, Pius clashed with
Italian Fascism, and he repeatedly condemned Hitler and Nazism in the
early stages of their rise to power. But later he weakened his stance against
the Nazi regime, and he did support Franco’s brand of Fascism in Spain. In
Germany, fear of liberalism and Communism inclined many Catholics
toward rising Nazism. In 1933, Catholic opposition to Hitler collapsed, and
the political party led by prelate Ludwig Kaas gave Hitler the necessary
majority to take full possession of the government. At about the same time,
the bishops gathered at Fulda, and withdrew their earlier harsh words about
the dangers of Nazism. In Rome, Pius XI and his secretary of state Cardinal
Pacelli—who would later become Pius XII—felt that the time had come to
reach an agreement with Hitler, and within a few months a concordat was
signed that was seen in international circles as the Vatican’s qualified
approval of the Nazi regime. It took the pope several years to realize the
dangers of Nazism; for a long time he had seen it as an acceptable
alternative to Communism. Finally, in 1937, he issued two encyclicals, one
against Nazism and the other against Communism. The first of these
encyclicals, Mit brennender Sorge, declared that Nazism was a new form of
paganism, and accused Hitler of disregarding the Concordat of 1933. Five
days later, the parallel encyclical, Divini Redemptoris, condemned
Communism, which now caused him grave concern because Russia had
increased its antireligious propaganda. Communism was also making rapid
progress in Asia, and the pope feared that the Mexican Revolution would
lead to another Communist state. In this encyclical, he condemned the
Marxist view that religion is a means of oppressing the lower classes, and
declared that there could be no grounds for Christian collaboration with it.
Meanwhile, the ties developing between Hitler and Mussolini, and repeated
clashes with Italian Fascism, caused the pope to prepare a strong speech
condemning some of the actions of the Fascist regime in Italy, but he did
not yet break relations with it. He was still working on this speech when he
died.
    The conclave took only one day and three ballots to elect a successor.
This was Cardinal Pacelli, who indicated his intention of continuing the
policies of Pius XI by taking the name of Pius XII (1939–1958). A man
experienced in diplomatic affairs, he had a slight penchant for nepotism,
and a highly authoritarian and clerical view of the church. Pius XII was also
a mystic who spent hours in prayer, an indefatigable worker whose aides
often complained that he drove them too hard, and a man of personal
magnetism who was much respected by friend and foe alike. The early
years of his pontificate were dominated by World War II, which he had tried
unsuccessfully to prevent. When war became inevitable, he directed his
attention—again to no avail—to keeping Italy out of the conflict, and he
also supported a conspiracy to overthrow Hitler. Once war broke out, Pius
XII followed a policy of neutrality, hoping that by remaining above the fray
he could serve as a mediator at the appropriate time. This neutrality,
however, was achieved at the cost of silence in the face of Nazi atrocities
against the Jews, a policy for which he has been severely criticized. On this
point, even his apologists admit that he was aware of what was taking place
in Germany, and defend his policy on the grounds that protests would have
achieved little. But such considerations did not keep the pope from
denouncing Nazi atrocities against Catholics in Poland—even though the
Polish bishops reported that each protest over Vatican Radio was followed
by further measures against their flock. On these issues, Pius XII seems to
have been another exponent of what had been the basic mood of the papacy
since the Council of Trent: to protect the church at all costs, seeking for it as
much freedom and power as possible, subordinating all other issues to this
overriding concern. It is also probable that, while he feared a Nazi victory,
he was more concerned over the growth of Communism, and that in the war
between the Axis and the USSR, his sympathies were with the former. In
any case, he did repeatedly insist on the general principles by which nations
and governments ought to be judged, although he refrained from making
such judgments himself.
    While the pope’s reaction to the persecution of Jews in Germany and in
the occupied areas of Europe left much to be desired, there were other
Catholics who risked life and freedom for the sake of their Jewish brothers
and sisters. Pius himself was aware of the clandestine networks that were
helping Jews escape from Germany, France, and various countries in
Eastern Europe. And among the “righteous Gentiles” whom the
international Jewish community recognizes as having risen to the challenge
of the hour, often to the point of heroism, there are a number of Catholics.
    After the war, the pope’s international policy was primarily directed at
the threat of Communism. In 1949, he decreed automatic excommunication
for any who supported the Communists in whatever country. It was the time
of the great imperialistic expansion of Russia, whose orbit of influence soon
included most of Eastern Europe. In Asia, China had also become
Communist, and at the time it seemed that the Catholic Church in that vast
country—as well as all other churches—had been completely crushed.
Against this threat, and also hoping to avert future wars, Pius joined the
voices calling for a unified Europe. In 1953, he signed a concordat with
Franco’s regime in Spain—the main surviving bastion of Fascism after the
war. His reasons for this were many. The influence of Communists in the
government of Spain before the civil war had increased as tension mounted.
Catholics who feared Communism saw Franco and his movement as the
only alternative, which in turn gave rise to greater anticlericalism. Then the
civil war unleashed violent passions, resulting in the deaths of thousands of
priests, nuns, and monks. When the dust settled, Franco was in firm control
of the nation, and his staunchest allies were the most conservative among
the Catholic clergy. Therefore, in the midst of a world in which more and
more governments seemed to be turning against the church, the Vatican
welcomed Franco and his regime.
    The pope’s inclinations could also be seen in his understanding of the
papacy and its teaching and administrative authority. He tended to
centralize the government of the church, depriving the national episcopates
of much of their initiative. While looking at the ecumenical movement with
more favor than his predecessors, in 1950 he placed one more obstacle in
that movement’s progress by proclaiming the dogma of the Bodily
Assumption of Mary into heaven. But, above all, he was extremely
suspicious of innovations in the field of theology. In 1950, the bull Humani
generis reiterated earlier warnings against innovations in theology. Some of
the most creative Catholic theologians of the time were silenced, among
them several whose writings laid the groundwork for the Second Vatican
Council. One of the most creative Catholic thinkers of the twentieth
century, Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, was forbidden by the Holy Office from
publishing his theological works. They didn’t appear until after his death in
1955. In France, some Catholic leaders had sought to penetrate the labor
movement through worker priests, who took employment as common
laborers, sometimes without even revealing their identity as priests until
they were well-known and accepted by the group. Although the movement
was criticized by the more conservative elements in French Catholicism, at
first it had the support of the Vatican. But when several priests became
leaders in the labor movement, and took a stance against capital, the pope
withdrew his support. He ordered all worker priests to withdraw from the
labor force, and he closed the seminary where most of them were being
trained. It was the time of the Cold War, and the pope—who during World
War II had hoped to be a mediator—now found himself drawn into the
conflict, seemingly left with no alternative to Communism besides
reactionary conservatism.
    On the other hand, some of the policies of Pius XII did pave the way for
the great changes that took place during the next pontificate. His encyclical
of 1943, Divino afflante Spiritu, encouraged the use of modern methods of
biblical study. Although he later insisted on the need for caution in that
enterprise, the biblical studies that had been undertaken under the influence
of Divino afflante Spiritu would later contribute to the renewal of the
church. The reform of the liturgy, which was one of the earliest actions of
the Second Vatican Council, had been encouraged by him, albeit with great
caution. But, above all, he led the way to the internationalization of the
church that eventually made possible the Second Vatican Council. He
understood that the age of colonialism had come to an end, and therefore
continued his predecessors’ policy of strengthening churches outside of
Europe. He also encouraged the emancipation of colonies, to the point that
he was criticized as being an enemy of Europe—particularly of France,
which for a time was very reluctant to grant independence to its colonies.
While insisting on his universal jurisdiction and direct control of all
churches, he encouraged the formation of indigenous churches under the
leadership of native bishops. Very significant for later developments was
the formation, under Vatican auspices, of the Conference of Latin American
Bishops (C.E.L.A.M.), the first such official organization on an international
and regional basis. He also brought non-Italians into the curia, and
internationalized the college of cardinals, which at the time of his death was
only one-third Italian. Thus, though he was a conservative pope after the
fashion of the councils of Trent and Vatican I, he set in motion the
machinery that would eventually lead to the Second Vatican Council and to
the reformation it espoused.
    In conclusion, after the American and French Revolutions, and in the
midst of a radically changing context, all Christian churches had to face
new political, economic, social, and intellectual circumstances. In general,
Protestantism sought the means to take those new realities into account; but
Catholicism took the opposite tack. Obviously, there were many exceptions
to that generalization. One of the net results, however, was that by the time
of World War I Protestants and Catholics were as far apart from each other
as they had been at any previous time. Protestants looked upon the Catholic
Church as a relic of bygone ages, while Catholics were convinced that
Protestantism had confirmed its heretical character by capitulating before
the challenges of the modern world. As long as such conditions prevailed,
there was little hope for a rapprochement between the two branches of
Western Christianity. Although, as we shall see (in Chapters 35 and 36),
World War I forced much of Protestantism to reevaluate its facile
acceptance of modernity, it would not be until the second half of the
twentieth century, with the Second Vatican Council, that official Roman
Catholicism would review its exceedingly negative view of modernity.
                                    33

                  Geographic Expansion


   Just as the development of improved means of communication has
   greatly facilitated the propagation of the Gospel and the sending forth
   of the pure and hopeful influences of western civilization, so the
   drawing together of the nations and races as a result of these
   improvements has made possible the more rapid spread of influences
   antagonistic to Christ’s Kingdom.
                         WORLD MISSIONARY CONFERENCE, EDINBURGH, 1910


          THE MISSIONARY ENTERPRISE IN THE AGE OF
                               COLONIALISM
In the Western world, the attitudes of Christians toward colonialism were
widely divergent. Some opposed particular colonizing ventures on the
grounds that they were contrary to the national interest. Many Christians of
profound convictions protested against the treatment of people in some
colonized areas. But in general the colonizers—including many devout
Christians—were convinced that their enterprise was justified by the
benefits the colonized would receive. As they saw matters, God had placed
the benefits of Western civilization and Christian faith in the hands of white
people—both Europeans and North American settlers—in order for them to
share it with the rest of the world. That responsibility was the so-called
white man’s burden: to take to the rest of the world the benefits of
industrialization, capitalism, democracy, and Christianity.
    There were grounds for such visions. Medical science, for instance,
reached many remote areas and saved countless lives. Trade and industrial
development increased the wealth of many areas, and for that reason gained
the support of certain classes among native populations. All over the world,
there were people who benefitted from the improved conditions, and for
whom modernity’s promises of progress became a reality. But modernity
also produced the dislocation of vast masses who now became landless, the
destruction of many of the cultural patterns that had sustained societies for
centuries, and growing disparities in living conditions between the rich and
the poor throughout the world. In any case, the racial and cultural arrogance
that formed the foundation of the entire enterprise could not fail to produce
the anticolonial reaction that marked the middle of the twentieth century.
    The church was deeply influenced by all these circumstances and ideas,
but the relationship between colonialism and missions was very complex.
Although the accusation is often made that missionaries were agents of
colonialism, this was not always true, for there were missionaries who
opposed colonialism, and many who criticized and condemned various
aspects of it. Nor is it always true that missionary work entered through a
door opened by colonialism; for, although in many cases missionaries
worked in colonized areas, there were many other cases where missionaries
reached regions that had never before been visited by white traders or
colonizers. Also, many of the colonial authorities and commercial interests
opposed missionary work, for they feared that religious conflict would
interrupt trade. It is true that the colonial expansion of the West—
particularly the Protestant West—coincided with its missionary expansion,
so that the two at times aided and at times impeded each other.
    One of the most remarkable characteristics of the missionary enterprise
during the nineteenth century was the formation of missionary societies.
Some of these drew their membership from a single denomination, while
others broke confessional barriers. All were voluntary societies, for the
churches as institutions did not usually support missions. Forerunners of the
movement were the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (S.P.C.K.),
founded in 1698, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts (S.P.G.), founded in 1701. Both were Anglican, and for some
time most of their work was among British expatriates. Due to the impact of
Pietists, Moravians, and Methodists, several similar societies were founded
during the eighteenth century. But the heyday of missionary societies began
late in the eighteenth century, and lasted through the nineteenth. In 1792,
thanks to the perseverance of William Carey, the Particular Baptist Society
for Propagating the Gospel amongst the Heathen was founded (its name
was later shortened to Baptist Missionary Society). Three years later, partly
through the example of the Baptists, a group of Methodists, Presbyterians,
and Congregationalists founded the London Missionary Society (L.M.S.).
The Church Missionary Society (C.M.S.), dating from 1799, drew its
members from the evangelical wing of the Anglican Church. Other societies
were also created with more specific goals, such as the British and Foreign
Bible Society, founded in 1804. The movement then spread to other lands,
and soon there were Protestant missionary societies in the Netherlands,
Switzerland, Denmark, Germany, and several other countries. In France,
there were both Protestant and Catholic societies. Congregationalists in the
United States founded the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign
Missions. When one of its missionaries, Adoniram Judson, became a
Baptist, a Baptist missionary society was organized to support him and
others, and this society eventually gave birth to the American Baptist
Convention.
  William Carey, often called “the father of modern missions,” devoted a great deal of his time to
            learning the languages of India and translating the Scriptures into them.

    The emergence of these societies points to another characteristic of the
missionary movement of the nineteenth century: its widespread support. For
centuries before that, most missionary work had taken place with the
official support of the state. But in the nineteenth century, most Western
governments had little or no official relationship with missionary
enterprises. For years, the British East India Company tried to bar
missionaries from the lands under its rule. Most European governments, as
well as the United States, adopted a neutral—and sometimes slightly hostile
—stance toward missionaries and their goals. In theory at least,
missionaries could count on no other protection than that afforded to their
fellow citizens engaged in other endeavors. But it was at the point of
financial support that the contrast proved greatest between the modern
missionary movement and its predecessors. Few governments—and few
churches—contributed funds to the enterprise. Lacking such civil and
ecclesiastical support, those interested in missions had to appeal to the
public at large, and hence the growth and proliferation of missionary
societies.
    In consequence, for the first time in centuries the work of international
missions captivated the interest of the general membership of churches.
Naturally, even then there were many who showed no interest in the matter.
But those who wished to do so, from the youngest to the oldest, could make
a contribution to the preaching of the gospel in distant and even exotic
lands. Missionary societies, for their part, brought news of what was taking
place in the remotest areas of Asia or Africa, and thus became one of the
main sources of public information and education regarding other lands and
cultures.
    Women played an important role in all this. In many denominations,
both in the United States and in Europe, women organized their own
missionary societies, and collected funds and supplies for work overseas. At
first, all the missionaries themselves were men—although many were
married and took their wives with them. But soon it was shown that women
had a great contribution to make overseas. Some feminine missionary
societies began sending their own missionaries. Among Catholics, such
missionaries were usually nuns, and the work that they did in the mission
field was similar to what they did in their homeland: teaching, nursing,
caring for the aged, and so forth. Among Protestants, female missionaries
began assuming responsibilities that were forbidden to them at home, such
as preaching and organizing churches. (The underlying racism of the times
made it acceptable for women to have over the natives an authority that
sexism denied them in their own lands.) Eventually, the example of these
women, and the news of their success, prompted women who remained at
home in Europe and the United States to demand the opportunity to do the
same. Thus, the missionary movement is one of the roots of the feminist
movement among Western Protestants.
    Finally, another important consequence of the missionary movement was
the spirit of cooperation that began appearing between various
denominations. Rivalries that seemed justifiable in Europe or the United
States were a stumbling block to missionary work in India or China.
Therefore, many missionaries, and soon their converts also, took steps to
lower the barriers between denominations. Some missionary societies drew
their members from more than one denomination. In the mission field, ways
were constantly sought to present a common witness and avoid competition.
Thus, the ecumenical movement, at least among Protestants, has one of its
main roots in the missionary experience of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.

                           ASIA AND OCEANIA
For centuries, the ancient civilizations of the Far East had fascinated
Europeans. Medieval books included vague rumors of strange customs and
incredible monsters. Then Marco Polo and other travelers brought news of
fabulous riches in the courts of China and India. In the sixteenth century,
the Portuguese established permanent trading posts there, and soon
thereafter other European nations began seeking similar footholds.
Commerce and its protection often led to military and political conquest,
and by the time of World War I there were few countries in Asia and the
Pacific that were not under colonial rule. Although not always in agreement
with colonial policies, missionaries and the churches they founded played a
role in the process of European expansion.
    In Asia, the impact of the new wave of colonial expansion was first felt
on the Indian subcontinent—now India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Sri
Lanka. As we have seen, Christianity had existed there since ancient times
(in Vol. I, Chapter 25), and Catholicism had been introduced in the
sixteenth century (in Vol. I, Chapter 37). Early in the eighteenth century, the
first Protestant missionaries had arrived under the auspices of a Danish king
profoundly affected by Pietism. But it was in the nineteenth century, with
the sudden growth of British influence, that the greatest Protestant
missionary advance took place.
    The British East India Company had begun its operations in India early
in the eighteenth century. A hundred years later, it ruled almost the entire
eastern coast of the subcontinent. A few years earlier, the British had taken
Ceylon. By the middle of the nineteenth century, practically the entire area
was under British rule, either direct or indirect. In 1858, through an act of
Parliament, the government of India—then in the hands of the East India
Company—was seized by the British government and placed directly under
the rule of the crown.
    During its first century in operation, the British East India Company
opposed missionary work, for it feared that Christian preaching would
cause tension and rioting that would hinder trade. This policy met little
opposition in England, where interest in missions was scarce. It was partly
as a result of the efforts of William Carey that these conditions changed,
and therefore he has properly been called the founder of modern missions.
    Although reared in an Anglican household, William Carey had become a
Baptist. A teacher and cobbler by trade, he was fascinated by the news of
new lands that Captain Cook was discovering in the Pacific. Combining his
faith to his awareness of distant lands, he came to the conviction, unusual in
his time, that Christians had the obligation to preach the gospel in distant
countries to people who had not heard it. After much criticism, he was able
to gather a number of like-minded people and create the Particular Baptist
Society for Propagating the Gospel amongst the Heathen. When the Society
proved unable to find someone to send as a missionary, Carey decided to go
himself. In 1793, he finally landed in Calcutta with his family and a
physician accompanying him in his labors. The difficulties were many—on
one occasion he wrote to his supporters in England that there were obstacles
all around, and, characteristically, that there was no alternative but to move
ahead! His zeal, and particularly his reports to England, resulted in new
interest in missions, and he was eventually joined by a second contingent of
missionaries. Since the British East India Company would not allow the
new arrivals to settle in Calcutta, Carey moved his residence to nearby
Serampore, and this became the headquarters of the entire enterprise. He
and his associates—one of whom was a printer—felt that one of their first
tasks was to make the Bible available to the Indian population. Carey had
an unusual gift for learning languages. Before he died, he had translated the
Bible, in whole or in part, into thirty-five languages—translations later
criticized for the errors resulting from his limited knowledge of many of
these tongues. He also devoted his efforts to putting an end to the custom of
burning widows on their husbands’ funeral pyres. On both scores, he
achieved remarkable success.
                          Carey baptizing his first convert.

    Carey’s work, and the reports that reached both Britain and the United
States, inspired many to emulate him. Many of the missionary societies
founded early in the nineteenth century owed their existence to his
influence. Increasing numbers of Christians, having heard of Carey’s
exploits, felt called to similar careers. In 1813, when the charter of the
British East India Company came up for renewal, Parliament included in
the new charter a clause granting missionaries free access to areas under
company control.
    In India itself, Carey’s work did not at first produce many converts. But
toward the end of his career, it was clear that a firm foundation for a church
had been established in the land and that others would continue his work. In
the next generation, the Scotsman Alexander Duff became famous for his
work in education, for he was convinced that the best way for Christianity
to enter India was through education. As a result of his work and that of
others, by the time India gained its independence a century later, many of
the leaders of the new nation were either Christian or people profoundly
influenced by the Christian faith.
    Meanwhile, there were mass conversions among the lower classes.
Protestant missionaries insisted that the caste system that prevailed in India
was wrong. In Indian tradition, the very breaking of bread that took place in
communion was a breaking of caste if it took place among people of
varying castes. Therefore, many of the people termed untouchable, and
several tribes who had traditionally been excluded from mainstream society,
found Protestantism liberating and joined it. Likewise, many women found
freedom in Christianity, and responded by assuming positions of
responsibility within it. Most remarkable among them was Pandita
Ramabai, who traveled to England and the United States, and then returned
to India to devote the rest of her life to the education of women. As a result
of her work, many women were able to make significant contributions both
to the church and to Indian society.
    In Southeast Asia, zones of colonial influence were separated by the
once-powerful kingdom of Siam (now Thailand). East of it, French colonies
appeared—in what was then called French Indochina—while the British
took charge of Burma (now Myanmar), the area west of Siam. In the French
area, Catholic missionaries organized their converts into separate villages
where they could live according to Catholic teachings. As a result, the area
was divided between Catholic and Buddhist villages until well into the
twentieth century. In Burma, the most famous missionary was Adoniram
Judson, an American Congregationalist sent by the American Board of
Commissioners for Foreign Missions who became a Baptist on his way to
the mission field. Following Carey’s example, he and his wife translated
Scripture into Burmese, Thai, and other languages. They gained few
converts, but one of these, Ko Tha Byu, later began a movement of mass
conversion among his tribe, the Karen—many of whom later sought refuge
in the United States in the twenty-first century to flee military repression. In
Siam, the only land of Southeast Asia that managed to preserve its
independence, there were both Catholic and Protestant missionaries.
Although their work was hindered by brief periods of persecution, by the
end of the century they had succeeded in founding fairly strong churches.
    China remained the great empire of the Far East. Christianity had been
introduced repeatedly, and repeatedly it had been quashed under severe
persecution and isolation. Late in the sixteenth century and early in the
seventeenth, Ricci and his Jesuit companions had managed to found a small
church (see Vol. I, Chapter 27). But then another period of isolationism set
in, and by the beginning of the nineteenth century the small Catholic
community in China was leading a precarious existence. Protestant
missionaries had long dreamed of entering China. One of Carey’s
companions had already begun the monumental task of translating the Bible
into Chinese—a translation that, like most others, was done with substantial
help and creativity on the part of native speakers. Then the Scotsman
Robert Morrison settled in Canton and devoted his life to translating the
Bible and other books into Chinese. It took him seven years to gain his first
convert, and he never had many. But his example, and the existence of a
Chinese translation of Scripture, kept alive the dream of penetrating that
vast land with the message of Christianity. The great difficulty, however,
was that the Chinese government did not favor the presence of foreigners
within its borders. Only a small number of those whom the Chinese
considered Western barbarians were allowed in certain restricted areas, and
it was through these ports that all trade took place.
    Then the Opium War broke out (1839–1842). This was one of the most
shameful episodes in the history of Western colonialism, for the British
found themselves going to war against China in defense of the alleged right
of British merchants to import opium into China in direct violation of
Chinese imperial decrees. The Treaty of Nanjing, ending hostilities, granted
the British the island of Hong Kong and opened five Chinese ports
important to British trade. After these events, other powers followed the
British example, using their military might to force ever-greater concessions
from the Chinese. Many of the treaties forcing such concessions also made
provisions for the presence of missionaries in Chinese territory, some also
granting them special protection. Eventually, even Chinese Christians were
covered by a number of special provisions—leading to what many called
rice Christians, people who apparently embraced Christianity in order to
enjoy privileges such as food. Soon missionaries from various countries and
denominations arrived in China, and their initial success was greatly
encouraging.
    One unexpected by-product of Christian preaching was the Rebellion of
Taiping—the Heavenly Kingdom. This movement was begun by Hong
Xiuquan, a school teacher who read a number of Christian treatises and
decided the time had come to establish the Heavenly Kingdom of the Great
Peace, over which he would reign. In that kingdom, all things would be
held in common, there would be equality between the sexes, and there
would be laws against prostitution, adultery, slavery, binding of girls’ feet,
opium, tobacco, and alcohol. In 1850, the movement led to open rebellion,
and the troops of the Heavenly Kingdom won several important victories.
In 1853, they established the Heavenly Capital in Nanjing, and even
threatened the imperial city of Beijing. Finally, with the help of the Western
powers, the imperial armies crushed the rebellion. It had lasted fifteen
years, and resulted in twenty million deaths. (It is interesting to note that
many missionaries who celebrated the revolutions and military heroes of
their native lands opposed the Taiping Rebellion on the grounds that its
violence was incompatible with Christian faith.)
    It was during the Taiping Rebellion that J. Hudson Taylor first arrived in
China. Forced to return to England by ill health, he then devoted his efforts
to founding and leading the China Inland Mission, under whose auspices he
returned to China. The purpose of this organization was to evangelize China
without introducing the divisions that existed in European and American
Protestantism. It accepted missionaries of all denominations, and resulted in
hundreds of churches in various areas of the country. It also refused to make
use of the supposed advantages to be obtained by foreign protection, being
aware that the use of such privileges created resentment among the Chinese
and would eventually prove costly.
    Taylor’s predictions came to pass. The Boxer Rebellion of 1899–1901
was the violent expression of Chinese resentment of foreign intervention. It
is estimated that well over thirty thousand Chinese Christians were killed—
some of them after being tortured, or after being forced to drink the blood
of others killed before them. The foreign diplomats in Beijing, who had
been bickering over the spoils of China, remained under siege until an army
of combined Western forces came to their succor. Eventually, the Western
powers crushed the rebellion, and the imperial government was forced to
make even greater concessions—including the payment of a huge
indemnification. Several missionary agencies, having learned the lesson of
the rebellion, refused to accept any payments. Eventually, all these
upheavals led to the fall of the empire. In 1911, rebellion broke out again,
the emperor was forced to abdicate, and the way was cleared for the
creation of the Republic of the United Chinese Provinces. By then,
Protestant missionaries numbered in the tens of thousands, churches were
flourishing in every province, and increasing numbers of Chinese were
taking positions of leadership in the church. The future appeared so bright
that some Western observers began speaking of a conversion of the entire
nation similar to what had taken place in the Roman Empire during
Constantine’s reign.
    During the first half of the nineteenth century, Japan was entirely closed
to all Western contact or influence. In 1854, Commodore M.C. Perry of the
U.S. Navy forced the Japanese to sign their first commercial treaty with a
Western power. Then Britain, France, the Netherlands, and Russia followed
suit. In 1864, a joint Western force put an end to all resistance to foreign
influence. The Japanese response was to acknowledge Western
technological superiority and to seek to learn as much as possible from the
West. By the end of the century, Japan was an industrial and military power
capable of defeating the Chinese and the Russians; in 1910, it annexed the
ancient kingdom of Korea. This process of rapid Westernization aided the
work of missionaries, who began arriving shortly after Commodore Perry’s
exploit. Soon there were churches in all the major cities of the nation, and
native leadership emerged. It is also interesting to note that near Nagasaki
Protestant missionaries found about a hundred thousand people who still
retained vestiges of what their ancestors had learned centuries earlier from
Francis Xavier and other Jesuit missionaries (see Vol. I, Chapter 37).
    The Japanese had learned Commodore Perry’s lesson well, and in 1876
they forced Korea to sign its first commercial treaty. Soon Korea found
itself signing similar treaties with the United States (1882), Great Britain
(1883), and Russia (1884). This opened the way for the first Protestant
missionaries to Korea: Methodists and Presbyterians from the United States
who arrived in 1884. Their strategy was to found churches that from the
very beginning could be self-supporting, and to develop the native
leadership necessary for such churches. The results were astounding.
Although Japanese occupation in 1910 created difficulties for the churches,
they continued to flourish, and soon Korea had more Christians per capita
than any other Far East nation besides the Philippines.
    The Philippines had been conquered and colonized much earlier by the
Spanish, and therefore at the opening of the nineteenth century the
population was mostly Catholic. The example of the Spanish-American
colonies, however, led to increased hopes for independence, which was
proclaimed in 1896, although not achieved until fifty years later. Two years
later, as a result of the Spanish-American War, Spain ceded the Philippines
to the United States. This did not stop the struggle for independence, which
continued until the islands were finally made independent in 1946. During
the struggle against Spain, the Catholic Church was an instrument in the
hands of the colonial government, and this gave rise to the Filipino
Independent Church—which later was influenced by Protestantism and
departed even further from Catholicism. Protestants entered the islands
during the period of American occupation, but by 1914 the number of
churches they had founded remained small.
    Indonesia, originally colonized by the Portuguese, was mostly in Dutch
hands by the beginning of the nineteenth century. The Dutch East India
Company, which until 1798 had been in charge of the colonial enterprise,
had been inimical to missions. Therefore, it was mostly during the
nineteenth century that substantial efforts were made to reach the
Indonesian population. Corrupt governments and outright exploitation were
strongly criticized by Christians in the Netherlands, and in 1870 a measure
of reform was introduced. Meanwhile, English adventurer James Brooke
had been named rajah—or king—of the state of Sarawak on the island of
Borneo. He and his successors (first his son Sir Charles Anthony Brooke,
then his grandson Sir Charles Vyner Brooke) invited missionaries into their
territories, hoping that they would improve education and medical services.
They also encouraged the immigration of Chinese Christians. By the end of
the nineteenth century Christianity had made great numeric gains in
Indonesia—although at present the region of Sarawak is part of Malasia.
Reports of the voyages of Captain James Cook awakened interest in distant lands, and in missions to
                                             them.

    To the east and south of these lands were other territories known only
vaguely by Europeans since the sixteenth century, but which were brought
to the attention of Britain by the explorations of Captain James Cook
between 1768 and 1779. This was the case of William Carey, whose interest
in foreign lands was awakened by Cook’s voyages. The largest of these
lands, Australia and New Zealand, were soon colonized by the British, who
established in them churches similar to those in their homeland. Both the
aboriginal inhabitants of Australia and the Maoris of New Zealand were
decimated by European immigrants and the diseases they brought with
them, and it fell to the churches to protest against the mistreatment and
exploitation of these native people. In New Zealand, movements such as the
Hau Hau and Ringatu, which combined ancient Maori traditions with
Christian teachings and a desire for justice and vindication enjoyed a wide
following among the Maoris into the twenty-first century. Smaller islands of
the Pacific at first drew the interest of adventurers and dreamers, then of
missionaries, and, finally, of imperial powers who entered the scene in their
mad rush for colonies after 1870. By the end of the century, virtually every
island had been claimed by a foreign power. By then, most of the
population of Polynesia was Christian, and there were also churches in
almost all the islands of Melanesia and Micronesia. Only in the remotest
regions—the interior of New Guinea, for example—had the name of Christ
not yet been proclaimed.

                  AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WORLD
For centuries, Muslim power had blocked European expansion toward the
south and the southeast. Beyond the Muslim lands on the north coast of
Africa were barren lands, and beyond these were tropical areas deemed
unhealthy for Europeans. Therefore, Europe came to see Africa and the
Muslim world as obstacles to reaching the riches of the East. But during the
course of the nineteenth century that perspective changed radically. At the
beginning of the century, most of the Near East and the north coast of
Africa belonged to the Ottoman Empire, whose capital was Constantinople
—renamed Istanbul in 1930. By the opening of World War I, Great Britain,
France, and Italy had control of the north coast of Africa, and the Ottoman
Empire was about to disappear. This led many to consider the possibility of
beginning missionary work in those areas and in other traditionally Muslim
lands.
    However, there were already other Christians in the region—it had, after
all been the birthplace of Christianity. Therefore, the main issue for Western
missionaries was how their work should relate to those older churches. In
general, Roman Catholics sought to bring entire bodies of Eastern
Christians into communion with Rome and obedience to the pope. Such
groups, while keeping their rites and traditions, in fact became Roman
Catholics, known as Uniates. In order to deal with issues affecting them in a
particular way, the Congregation of Eastern Rites was founded in Rome in
1862. Although Roman Catholics also sought to convert Muslims, they had
relatively little success. Protestants, on the other hand, often sought to
cooperate with the ancient Eastern churches, hoping that such cooperation
would bring about a renewal in the life of those churches. This program did
achieve a measure of success, but in the end it created tensions within the
ancient churches, which then divided. While the conservative wing returned
to its older practices, the more progressive simply became Protestant. It was
from such schisms that Protestantism gained the majority of its earliest
adherents, although eventually it also began making converts from the
Muslim population. Such work was particularly successful in Egypt, Syria,
and Lebanon.
   There were few European enclaves in black Africa at the beginning of
the nineteenth century. Portuguese rule in Angola and Mozambique did not
extend far inland. In 1652, the Dutch had established a colony on the Cape
of Good Hope. Shortly thereafter, the French opened a trading post in
Senegal. In 1799, the British founded Sierra Leone as a land for freed slaves
returning to Africa. That was the extent of European colonization in Africa
at the beginning of the century. In sharp contrast, by 1914 the only
independent states remaining in the entire continent were Ethiopia and
Liberia—and the latter was a creation of the early abolitionist movement in
the United States.
   The process of colonization was fairly slow in the early nineteenth
century. The British took the Cape from the Dutch, who moved north and
founded new colonies. In 1820, the first American blacks arrived in Liberia,
which became independent in 1847. Meanwhile, missionaries were
penetrating into areas never before seen by Europeans, and reporting on the
ravishes of the slave trade and the economic resources of the interior of
Africa. In 1867, diamonds were found in South Africa. France sought to
combine its holdings in Algeria with those in Senegal. Germany entered the
contest in 1884 by taking possession of Namibia. Leopold II of Belgium,
whose powers in his own kingdom were limited, took the colonization of
the Congo as a personal enterprise, and in 1908 the area officially became
the Belgian Congo. In 1885, the Spanish claimed Rio de Oro and Spanish
Guinea. Then Italy took Eritrea. By then, the rest of the continent had been
divided among the British, French, and German.
                    Africa 1914: The Height of Colonial Expansion

    All these events aroused missionary interest in Europe and the United
States. In general, Catholic missions were most successful in Catholic
colonies, while Protestants gained more adherents in British and German
colonies. Catholics were also hindered there by disputes over questions of
jurisdiction—Portugal still claimed its ancient rights of patronage over the
entire African church, while France and Belgium disputed the Congo
valley.
     This statue in Cathedral Square in Edinburgh honors the memory of David Livingstone.

   The most famous Protestant missionary to Africa was David
Livingstone, a native of Scotland who repeatedly traveled across southern
Africa preaching the gospel, healing the sick—for he was also a physician
—and taking copious notes of all the marvels he saw. Livingstone’s hope
and purpose was not only that people would be converted to Christianity,
but also that the horrors of the slave trade would be stopped by opening
Africa to legitimate trade. In pursuit of that end, he sometimes traveled as a
missionary and sometimes as a representative of the British government,
always reporting what he saw and gaining the trust and love of the many
Africans who came to know him. His writings did much to arouse interest
in black Africa in both his native Scotland and throughout the North
Atlantic, and were important factors contributing to abolition of the slave
trade.
                   Africa 1984: The Growth of Independent Nations

    By 1914, not only was most of Africa in colonial hands, but in every one
of those territories there were Christian churches. This was true both in the
major cities and in many remote villages in the interior of the continent. By
then, many of these churches were training their own leadership and
extending their work to new areas. One of the first African-born
missionaries, Samuel Crowther—ordained in 1843—enthusiastically related
that the experience of worshiping and preaching in his native tongue was
akin to having a dream. But a long struggle would follow, as African
leaders emerged who sought equality with foreign-born missionaries.

                             LATIN AMERICA
The impact of independence on the Catholic Church of Latin America has
already been noted in Chapter 29. Independence, however, also led to the
founding of Protestant churches in every nation of Latin America. At first,
this was the result of immigration. The new governments were convinced
that they should encourage immigration for a number of reasons. First of
all, since their goal was to imitate the industrial development of countries
such as Great Britain, it was hoped that immigration from those areas would
provide the experienced personnel necessary for such development. Second,
there were still vast expanses of untilled, arable land. Immigrants settling on
such lands would bring them into production and increase the wealth of the
nation. Third, it was necessary to introduce and disseminate ideas contrary
to those coming from Spain and still fostered by many in the Catholic
Church. Therefore, throughout the entire nineteenth century, several Latin
American governments—particularly the liberal governments—encouraged
immigration from Europe and the United States.
    To implement that policy, it was necessary to remember that many of the
prospective immigrants were Protestants who were not willing to abandon
their faith. To force them to renounce it would encourage the immigration
of unprincipled hypocrites—a bitter lesson that Mexico learned in Texas.
Therefore, many governments, even in countries that did not extend such
freedom to their own citizens, issued laws guaranteeing freedom of religion
to immigrants. Soon, however, they saw the incongruence of such laws, and
felt compelled to grant their own citizens equal rights. Thus, the policy of
encouraging foreign immigration eventually favored the spread of
Protestantism among the native population.
    Most of the early immigrants came from Europe. Very few came from
the United States (if one discounts those who moved into territories taken
from Mexico), for it was the time of North American expansion to the West,
and there were ample lands to be had there without migrating to Latin
America. Large numbers of Scots went to Argentina, Uruguay, and Chile,
where they could find climates similar to their own, and in many cases
better economic conditions than they had at home. Therefore, long before
the first Latin Americans were converted to Protestantism, Protestant
services were held in English in the major cities of southern Latin America.
    A particularly interesting case of mission-by-immigration was that of
James Theodore Holly and his companions, one hundred and ten black
Episcopalians who emigrated to Haiti from the United States hoping to find
greater freedom and to preach the gospel to Haitians. After eighteen
months, forty-three had died of various diseases. Most of the survivors
decided to return to the United States or to move on to Jamaica. But Holly
and a handful remained and founded a church. In 1876, Holly was
consecrated by the Episcopal Church to be the first bishop of the Apostolic
Orthodox Church of Haiti—later the Episcopal Church of Haiti.
    Immigration eventually led to missions among native Latin Americans.
The first missionary to arrive was probably the Scotsman James Thomson,
a Baptist representative of the British and Foreign Bible Society who
arrived in Buenos Aires in 1818. Over the next few years, he visited several
countries—from Argentina and Chile to Cuba and Mexico—and then
departed for other lands. In Colombia, with the aid of some liberal priests,
he founded a Bible society. His work consisted mostly in the distribution of
Spanish Bibles and in personal discussions with priests and others. It was
during the second half of the century that permanent Protestant work began
in most South American countries. The first record of a Protestant sermon
given in Spanish in Buenos Aires is dated 1867. At approximately the same
time, the Presbyterian Church was beginning work in Chile. In general, it
was after 1870 that missionary agencies from the United States began
taking an active interest in Latin America.
    One of the factors inhibiting such interest, in Europe as well as in the
United States, was the presence of Roman Catholicism in the area. To
organize missions to Latin America was to imply that Catholics were not
Christian—or that their Christianity was defective—a step that many
Protestant agencies and churches were not willing to take. Particularly
among Anglicans and Episcopalians, there was strong opposition to
missions among Catholics. Therefore, the earliest Anglican missions in
Latin America worked among Indians in Tierra del Fuego.
    By the beginning of the twentieth century, however, Protestant missions
had made great strides in Latin America. Most of the early missionaries
were concerned not only with the salvation of souls, but also with both the
physical health and the education of the populations they served. Therefore,
Protestants soon became known for their work in education and medicine.
Also, as the prestige of the United States grew, so did the churches with ties
to it. And, while most of the early missionaries had been representatives of
the larger denominations, by the beginning of the twentieth century there
was an increasing number of missionaries from small, conservative
denominations.
   Other new churches in Latin America were the result of schisms. In both
Mexico and Puerto Rico, groups that broke away from the Catholic Church
eventually became Episcopalians. In Chile, a small, charismatic group
expelled from the Methodist Church in 1910 formed the Methodist
Pentecostal Church, which soon outgrew its parent body (see Chapter 37).
Thus, by the time World War I broke out in 1914, there were significant
numbers of Protestants in every country in Latin America, both in churches
that were the direct result of missions, and in others that had been born in
Latin America itself.

                    THE ECUMENICAL MOVEMENT
In retrospect, it may well be that the most significant development in
Christianity in the nineteenth century was the beginning of a truly universal
church. Until then, Christianity had been almost entirely a Western religion.
By 1914, there were churches in almost every nation on the globe, and these
churches were beginning to develop their own leadership as well as their
own understanding of what it meant to be Christian within their particular
context. This was the birth of the ecumenical movement in two senses. First
of all, the very word ecumenical means pertaining to the entire inhabited
earth. Therefore, never before had Christianity been as ecumenical as it
became in the nineteenth century. Second, if by ecumenical one means that
which has to do with the unity of Christians, it is clear that one of the
driving forces leading toward the modern Christian unity movement was
the missionary movement.
    In the United States, where people of different Christian confessions
lived next to one another, ecumenical sentiments gained ground as the result
of various causes that appealed to people across denominational lines:
abolitionism, temperance, fundamentalism, liberalism, and so forth. But
even there, since denominational allegiance usually posed no obstacle to the
task at hand, divisions were seldom questioned. Perhaps the most serious
such questioning was the founding of the Disciples of Christ (see Chapter
27)—and in the end they became one more denomination.
     In overseas missions, however, cooperation became mandatory. Bible
translations prepared by missionaries of one denomination were used by
others, and it soon became apparent that coordination in such efforts would
be good stewardship of limited resources. Also, where such vast lands were
waiting to hear the word of the gospel, it made sense to agree on which
denomination or missionary agency would take responsibility for each area.
Most important of all, however, was the importance of presenting a single
interpretation of the gospel to people who had never heard of it rather than
presenting a number of competing interpretations, each claiming to be true.
Divisions that seemed perfectly natural in Europe or the United States made
little sense in southern India or Japan. Therefore, those who were consumed
with a burning zeal for the conversion of the world were soon convinced
that Christians of different traditions must work together.
     The great forerunner of the ecumenical movement was none other than
William Carey, who suggested that an international missionary conference
be convened at Cape Town, South Africa, in 1810. He hoped that such a
conference would bring together missionaries and missionary agencies from
all over the world in order to exchange information and coordinate their
plans. At that time, many set great store by their particular traditions, thus,
Carey’s suggestion fell on deaf ears. It would be exactly a hundred years
before his call would be heeded. Meanwhile, many conferences took place
on a smaller scale, both in the sending countries and fewer people in the
mission field.
     Finally, in 1910, the first World Missionary Conference gathered in
Edinburgh, Scotland. In contrast to earlier conferences, this one would be
attended by official delegates of missionary societies, their numbers in
proportion to each agency’s financial contribution to the entire global
missionary enterprise. It was also stipulated that the conference would deal
exclusively with missions to non-Christians, and that therefore there would
be no discussion of Protestant missions among Catholics in Latin America,
or among the Eastern Orthodox in the Near East. It was also decided that
questions of faith and order would not be discussed, for it was feared that
such discussions could only lead to further alienation. In preparation for the
conference, hundreds of people around the world participated in
preliminary studies, keeping in contact with the entire picture through
correspondence and regional or local conferences. When the conference
finally convened, most representatives were British or North American.
There was also a significant number of representatives from the rest of
Europe. Only seventeen of the participants came from younger churches—
three of them as special guests of the conference’s executive committee.
    The conference fully achieved its basic goal of exchanging information
and plans, but its significance was far greater. For the first time, there had
been an international conference of such magnitude whose participants
were official representatives from missionary societies of various
denominations. This in itself paved the way for similar meetings in which
subjects other than missions would be discussed. Second, the conference
appointed a Continuation Committee, thereby indicating that a movement
had begun that was fully expected to continue. The work of that committee
resulted in further studies, conferences, and eventually in the formation of
the International Missionary Council. Third, the conference gave
international stature to many who would become the leaders of the
ecumenical movement in the early decades of the twentieth century—
foremost among them Methodist layman John R. Mott. Finally, the
conference of Edinburgh was important even in what it excluded—
particularly issues of faith and order and of missions in Latin America—for
out of such exclusions developed the Faith and Order movement and the
Committee on Cooperation in Latin America. The former would be one of
the strongest currents that led to the founding of the World Council of
Churches in 1948. In short, the 1910 World Missionary Conference of
Edinburgh was the most important forerunner of the modern ecumenical
movement.
    Meanwhile, international tensions were increasing, and Christians felt
called to gather, not only to discuss ecclesiastical matters but also to seek
ways to preserve international peace. On August 2, 1914, in the city of
Constance, Germany, a world organization promoting peace through the
churches was founded. That very day World War I exploded.
                                     34

            Roman Catholic Christianity


   Let us be free of the scandal of having some nations, the majority of
   whose citizens call themselves Christian, enjoying great riches, while
   others do not have what is needful and suffer hunger, disease, and all
   sorts of misery.


SECOND VATICAN COUNCIL

When we last directed our attention to the Roman Catholic Church, in
Chapter 32, we saw that its reaction to the modern world was mostly one of
fear and condemnation. Among the reasons for such a reaction were the loss
of the papal states to the new nation of Italy, the fear that the secular states
would hinder the work of the Catholic Church, and the concern that minds
would be led astray by modern ideas. In general, the history of the Catholic
Church until the pontificate of John XXIII, in the second half of the
twentieth century, was a continuation of the policies and attitudes set at the
Council of Trent, mostly in reaction against Protestantism. At the same
time, there were those within the Catholic Church who felt that an attitude
of condemnation and wholesale rejection of modern trends was both a
theological and a pastoral mistake. During the earlier part of the twentieth
century, such loyal critics would repeatedly express their opinions and
alternatives, only to be suppressed or ignored. Therefore, the history of
Roman Catholicism during the first six decades of the twentieth century is
to a large extent the history of the conflict between those who wished to
continue in the direction set at Trent and at the First Vatican Council, and
those who wished to see more openness in the Church and more creative
encounters with the challenges of the modern world.

        JOHN XXIII AND THE SECOND VATICAN COUNCIL
The election of the next pope was more difficult than the previous one had
been. When the election of Cardinal Roncalli was announced, after the
eleventh ballot, many commented that the seventy-seven-year-old cardinal
had been elected as a transitional pope, to give the cardinals time to
determine the course to follow in the future. The elderly pope took the
name of John XXIII, and though his pontificate was brief (it lasted from
1958 to 1963), it was marked by momentous changes. His very decision to
take the name of John, tainted by the bitter memories of the Avignon
papacy and the Pisan antipope John XXIII, was an indication that the new
pope was willing to break new ground. He soon distressed many in the
curia, as well as his guards, by his unprecedented visits to the poorer
neighborhoods of Rome. Some even voiced fears that he might be too
simple a man for the heavy responsibilities that rested on his shoulders. But
he was a man of wide experience and profound wisdom, who had shown in
delicate posts in Bulgaria, Istanbul, and France that he understood the
intricacies of negotiation and diplomacy. Also, by having lived both in
Turkish Istanbul and in secularized Paris, he knew the degree to which the
church had cut off communication with the world at large. His great task
would be to restore that lost communication. It would be a task requiring all
his diplomatic skills, for there were many in the curia and in other high
positions in the church who did not share his perception of the situation.
    An old man with a vast mission, John XXIII felt the need to move
rapidly. Thus, three months after his election he announced his plan to call
an ecumenical council. Many in the curia did not approve of the idea. In
times past, most councils had been called in order to deal with a pressing
issue—usually a heresy thought to be particularly dangerous. Furthermore,
after the declaration of papal infallibility by the First Vatican Council, there
were those who thought that the age of councils had come to an end, and
that henceforth popes should rule the church as absolute monarchs. Indeed,
from the time of Pius IX there had been a constant tendency toward further
centralization. But Pope John saw matters otherwise. He insisted on calling
other bishops “my brother bishops,” and on asking their advice rather than
commanding them. He was also convinced that the time had come for a
total “updating”—in Italian, an aggiornamento—of the church, and that this
could only be done through the combined wisdom and concerns of the
bishops of the entire church. It is reported that when some among the curia
questioned the need for a council, the pope simply opened the windows and
said, “Let fresh air in.”
    The preparatory work for the council took more than two years.
Meanwhile, the pope issued the encyclical Mater et Magistra, which was
taken by many Catholic activists in the causes of justice as papal approval
of their work. Finally, on October 11, 1962, Pope John formally opened the
Second Vatican Council. Few expected that this assembly would mark a
radical departure from the course the church had followed during the last
four hundred years. The documents to be discussed and approved by the
council had been prepared by the curia, and in general did little more than
reaffirm traditional Catholic doctrine, warning against the dangers of the
time. But the pope had also taken steps to lead the council in other
directions. The previous year, he had created the Secretariat for the
Promotion of Christian Unity, thus indicating his seriousness in the pursuit
of a rapprochement with other Christians, and his intention to have the
council pursue this concern. His opening speech also set a tone that was
different from most of the preparatory documents, for he indicated that it
was time for the church to respond to the concerns of the modern world
with words of understanding and encouragement, rather than with blistering
condemnations. These goals were further aided by the presence of non-
Catholic observers—thirty-one at the outset, and ninety-three by the time
the Council closed its last session—and especially by the composition of
the assembly itself. Indeed, only 46 percent of the prelates present came
from Western Europe, Canada, and the United States. Fully 42 percent
represented Latin America, Asia, and black Africa. More than half of the
bishops present came from churches of such limited resources that their
living expenses while at the Council had to be covered with funds from the
richer churches. Thus, the composition of the Council itself pointed to the
shifts in the centers of world Christianity that marked the twentieth century
—as we shall see in Chapter 37. Such bishops were deeply concerned with
the need to address the plight of the poor, to speak to the non-Christian
world, and in general to speak a word of compassion and understanding
rather than of self-righteous condemnation. Therefore, the pope’s call for
the “medicine of mercy” in his opening speech did not fall on deaf ears.
    Very soon, it became apparent that the majority of the assembly wished
to see vast changes in the life of the church, and particularly in the manner
in which it addressed the modern world. The first document to be discussed
dealt with the liturgy. Of all the documents prepared beforehand, this was
the one that proposed most significant changes, for liturgical renewal had
been one of the concerns of the previous pope, and many in the curia had
come to accept the need for a renewal of the liturgy. Even so, the
conservative minority sought to block the proposed changes; but those who
supported an updating of the liturgy won the day. When the text was
returned to the commission that had drafted it, the instructions
accompanying it were a clear defeat for the conservatives. From that point
on, the documents written by the preparatory commissions were generally
returned for rewriting, with instructions for drastic changes—and even with
changes in the composition of the commissions themselves.
    Pope John did not live to see his council issue its first document, for he
died in June 1963. The next pope took the name of Paul, usually associated
with the Council of Trent, and some conservatives hoped that he would
dissolve the Council, or at least take strong measures to hinder its
deliberations. But Paul VI (1963–1978) almost immediately declared his
intention that the Council would continue its work. While there is no doubt
that he was more conservative than John XXIII, during the first session of
the council he had seen the degree to which Catholic leaders throughout the
world felt the need for significant new departures. When the second session
opened, on September 29, 1963, he called those present to “build a bridge
between the Church and the modern world.”
    Needing no further encouragement, the Council followed the pope’s
advice—probably sometimes with more alacrity than Paul VI would have
wished. The document on the liturgy, which from the outset had been the
most progressive, was approved by the assembly; but the rest were sent
back to be redrafted along lines more consonant with the church’s new
openness to the modern world. The Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, the
most tangible result of this second session, soon made its impact felt among
the faithful throughout the world, for it authorized the use of the vernacular
languages to a degree not permitted before. It also declared that:

   As long as the essential unity of the Roman rite is preserved, in the
   revision of the liturgical books steps shall be taken for proper
   variations and adaptations according to the needs of various groups,
   regions, and peoples, particularly in mission territories.

    The commissions that would then work on the redrafting of the various
documents were reconstituted, with greater participation by members
elected by the assembly. There were indications that the pope was not
happy with the turn of events, and some even feared that he might declare
an end to the Council. But Paul VI did not resort to such extreme measures,
and the third session of the Council (September 14 to November 21, 1964)
again proved that any documents presented before it that did not conform to
its reformist spirit would be rejected and returned to commission. The
Council issued documents on the church, the Eastern churches, and
ecumenism. Many of its members were distressed to see the pope add an
explanatory note to the document on the church, clarifying that episcopal
collegiality was to be understood in terms of the primacy of the pope, and
also add some interpolations to the decree on ecumenism—already
approved by the assembly—that non-Catholics would find less acceptable
than the original document. In addition, while many in the Council had
emphasized the centrality of Christ, counteracting the extremes to which
devotion to Mary could be taken, the pope on his own initiative declared the
Virgin to be the “Mother of the Church.”
    Notwithstanding the implications of these papal actions, when the
Council gathered for its fourth and last session (September 14 to December
8, 1965), its members were determined to see its work carried to fruition.
There was bitter debate on the document on religious freedom, which was
sternly opposed by conservatives from nations where Catholics were in the
majority. But once that last attempt failed, the opposition collapsed, and for
the rest of the session the more progressive in attendance maintained
complete control of the deliberations. Therefore, with relative ease the
Council issued fairly progressive documents on bishops, priests and their
formation, the laity, the church and non-Christians, missionary activity, and
so forth. The Constitution on the Church, (or Lumen gentium), did not place
its emphasis on the hierarchy and the clergy as the original document
prepared before the Council had done, but instead emphasized the notion of
the church as the people of God, of whom both laity and clergy are part.
Equally significant in manifesting a spirit different from that which had
prevailed in Catholicism for centuries were the documents on religious
freedom, on Christianity and Judaism, and on the church in the modern
world. The first of these declared that the religious freedom of individuals
as well as of groups must be respected, and that all religious groups have
the right to organize according to their own principles “as long as the just
requirements of public order are not violated.” On Christianity and Judaism,
the Council expressly rejected much traditional prejudice against the Jews,
and acknowledged the unique connection between the faith of the church
and that of Israel. The Pastoral Constitution on the Church in the Modern
World is the longest document ever issued by a council, and it sets a tone
that is drastically different from the nineteenth century. While insisting on
Catholic principles of faith and morality, it shows genuine openness to the
positive aspects of modernity, and deals creatively with family life,
economic and social issues, politics, technology and science, the
significance and diversity of human cultures, and so forth. In general, its
tone is set by its opening statement:

   The joys and hopes, the griefs and anxieties of people of our time,
   particularly of those who are poor or in any way afflicted, are the
   joys and hopes, the griefs and anxieties of Christ’s followers. Theirs
   is a community of people, people who, in union with Christ and with
   the guidance of the Holy Spirit, move forward toward the Kingdom
   of the Father and carry the message of salvation intended for all. For
   this reason this community knows that it is deeply united with
   humankind and its history.
    By the time the Council adjourned, it was clear that the Catholic Church
had entered a new epoch in its history. Many steps still needed to be taken
in order to implement the decisions of the Council. In many areas there
would be resistance; in others, changes would be rapid, and the Vatican
would move to moderate them. After the adjournment of the Council, Paul
VI moved slowly, perhaps fearing that changes that were too rapid could
lead to schism or at least to the loss of some of the more conservative
members of the Catholic Church. In 1968, he signaled his conservative
inclination by issuing the encyclical Humanae vitae, in which he banned all
artificial methods of birth control, overruling a papal commission that had
recommended the admission of some such methods. The feared schism did
occur, however, under the leadership of a conservative bishop. But it did not
carry with itself many members, and twenty years after its first session it
was clear that the Second Vatican Council had set in motion a process that
could not be stopped. An example of this continuing influence was the
American bishops’ declaration on nuclear war and the arms race, a
declaration that was much opposed by some as undue interference on the
part of the church in political and military matters. In their declaration, the
bishops were simply spelling out the declaration made earlier by the Second
Vatican Council, that the arms race could produce no permanent or true
peace. Later, in 1986, the American bishops issued A Pastoral Letter on
Catholic Social Teaching and the U.S. Economy—an even more
controversial statement on the social and economic order.

                 FROM PAUL VI TO BENEDICT XVI
Paul VI died in 1979 and, after the extremely brief pontificate of John Paul
I, was succeeded by John Paul II, the first non-Italian pope since the
sixteenth century. As a Pole, the new pope had known the struggle of the
church under both Germans and Russians, and had no illusions about either
Fascism or Communism. His pontificate was marked by growing tension in
Poland between the Communist government and the Catholic Church,
encouraged in its resistance by the election of one of its own to the see of
Peter—and led by Catholic layman Lech Walesa. This eventually led to the
fall of Communism in Poland, and to the nation’s freedom from the Soviet
Empire. In that struggle, the church in general, and the pope in particular,
played a decisive role, widely acknowledged by the Polish population at
large.
    The events in Poland were soon followed elsewhere by others of equally
cataclysmic import, ultimately leading to the dismemberment of the Soviet
Empire, and in Russia itself Communism was overthrown. The impact of
such changes would be felt most strongly in Eastern Europe, and therefore
by Orthodox churches, but it was also felt within the Roman Catholic
Church. Partly as a result of the new conditions among Eastern Orthodox,
in 1995 John Paul II issued the encyclical Ut unum sint, calling for greater
efforts to bridge the distance separating Catholics, Orthodox, and
Protestants.
    During the pontificate of John Paul II, several issues that had long been
brewing came to the foreground. One of these was the accusation of
rampant sexual abuse—particularly abuse of children—leveled at the
clergy. Damages awarded by courts in cases of such abuse, particularly in
North America and Europe, forced the Catholic Church to pay enormous
sums to those who had suffered abuse, and the pope named a special
commission to investigate such matters in the United States, and to set
policy for dealing with sexual abusers. John Paul was also forced to face the
issue of women’s ordination, which had come to the foreground among
Protestants in the second half of the twentieth century, and which now
became a subject of debate among many Catholics. In 1995, half a million
Catholics in Austria signed a petition for the ordination of women and
against the requirement of celibacy for the priesthood. The pope staunchly
opposed all of this. Also under his leadership, Roman Catholicism
throughout the world reaffirmed its condemnation of abortion, at a time
when several traditionally Catholic nations were legalizing it.
    While conservative on issues having to do with the life of the clergy and
those with monastic vows, and on matters of personal morality, John Paul II
spoke strong words on the plight of the poor and the injustice of their
oppression. He issued directives against priests holding political office—
and made his feelings on the matter known in a visit to Nicaragua, where he
was photographed wagging an accusatory finger at the Minister of Culture,
Father Ernesto Cardenal—but also insisted that the Church be involved in
issues of justice. Therefore, he was characterized both as conservative and
as progressive, depending on the vantage point of the observer and the
matter at issue. It should also be noted that it was probably during John Paul
II’s pontificate that the number of Roman Catholics in the world surpassed
one billion.
    John Paul II died in 2005 and was succeeded by German Cardinal
Joseph Ratzinger, who took the name of Benedict XVI. (Significantly, the
Catholic Church, which had not had a non-Italian pope since Adrian VI in
1522–1523, now elected two consecutive non-Italian popes. And at the time
of Ratzinger’s election, several prelates from outside the North Atlantic had
been considered for the position.) In 1981, Ratzinger had been appointed by
John Paul II to head the Congregation of the Doctrine of the Faith—a body
created to guard Catholic orthodoxy in lieu of the Inquisition. In that role,
he had become known for his conservative stance—particularly for his two
directives against liberation theology (see Chapter 37). At the point of his
election, some feared that his papacy would be dominated by his
conservative stance; but the early years of his pontificate indicated that he
was aware that new conditions in the world—and even resistance among
many Catholics—required more moderate measures. Thus, in 2009, while
insisting on celibacy as a requirement for the priesthood, he declared
himself ready to accept into the priesthood married Anglican clergy who
converted to Catholicism—an action that some saw as one of ecumenical
openness, and others called “fishing in the troubled waters” of an Anglican
communion deeply divided over the ordination of homosexuals. Three
years earlier, in a similar vein, he had dropped the traditional title of
patriarch of the West in what could be interpreted a gesture of openness to
Eastern Orthodoxy, but the patriarch of Constantinople interpreted as
expanding the claims of the papacy, pointing out that Benedict still retained
the titles of supreme pontiff and vicar of Christ. Also once again, as during
the reign of his predecessor, the issue of sexual abuse of children by priests,
and of the hierarchy’s attempts to cover up such practices, drew much
criticism and demanded much of his attention.

                THEOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTS
The openness of the Second Vatican Council surprised the world, which
was not acquainted with the undercurrents of thought that had long been
moving within the Catholic Church. But the theological work that led to it
had been taking place for half a century. Experiments such as the worker
priests were the result of theological stirrings that Rome did not regard with
pleasure. But, above all, there were a number of theologians whose Catholic
faith was never in doubt but whose work was either rejected or ignored by
the Vatican.
    Probably the most original of these theologians was Pierre Teilhard de
Chardin (1881–1955). The son of a family of the French aristocracy, at an
early age Teilhard decided to join the Jesuits. He was ordained a priest in
1911. When World War I broke out, he refused the rank of captain—which
he would have had as a chaplain—and served as a corporal, carrying the
wounded in stretchers. When the war ended, he was admitted as a full
member of the Society of Jesus, and in 1922 he completed his doctorate in
paleontology. He had always been interested in the theory of evolution, not
as a denial of creation, but rather as a scientific way of understanding the
inner workings of God’s creative power. His first writings on the relation
between faith and evolution, however, brought swift condemnation from
Rome. He was prohibited from publishing further works on theology, and
was sent to serve in China, where it was expected that he could do little
damage. As an obedient priest, he submitted. The ban prevented him from
publishing his manuscripts, but did not prevent him from continuing to
write. Therefore, while pursuing his paleontological work in China, he also
continued his theological work, and gave his manuscripts to a few trusted
friends. In 1929, he was instrumental in the identification of the
Sinanthropus skull, which further confirmed the principle of evolution and
brought him acclaim from within the international scientific community.
Still Rome refused to allow him to publish his philosophical and theological
works, now circulating among friends in France. Finally, in 1955, after his
death, his friends published his works, which immediately won wide
attention.
    While accepting the general principles of the theory of evolution,
Teilhard rejected the proposal that the survival of the fittest is the guiding
force behind evolution. Instead, he proposed the “cosmic law of complexity
and consciousness”—a pull in evolution toward the more complex and the
more highly conscious. Thus, what we see at any given stage of evolution is
a number of organisms that represent different stages or spheres in the
evolutionary process. This evolution begins with the “stuff of the universe,”
which is then organized into the geosphere—matter organized into
molecules, and molecules into bodies. The next stage is the biosphere, in
which life appears. From this emerges the noosphere, in which life attains
consciousness of itself. At this point, evolution does not end, but rather
takes on a conscious dimension. Humans as we now know them are not yet
the end of the evolutionary process. On the contrary, we are still part of
ongoing evolution, leading to human hominization. What is characteristic of
this new stage is that, as conscious beings, we are involved in our own
evolution.
    But we are not left without guidance on what human evolution should
be. The evolutionary movement has an omega point, the converging point
of maturation of the entire cosmic process. Indeed, to understand evolution
one must not look at it from beginning to end, but rather from end to
beginning. It is the end that makes the rest of the process meaningful. And
that end, that—omega point—is Jesus Christ. In him a new stage of
evolution—the final stage—has appeared: the Christosphere. Just as
humanity and divinity are perfectly united without confusion in Christ, in
the end each of us will be perfectly united with God, while also being
perfectly ourselves. The church, the body of Christ, is the new historic
reality centered in the omega point. Thus, Teilhard combined science with
theology and even with a strong mystical inclination. But, in contrast to
most mystical traditions, he was a world-affirming mystic.
    Even among the many who did not accept Teilhard’s grand cosmic
scheme, his influence could be seen. His attempt to look at the evolutionary
process “from end to beginning” encouraged modern theologians, both
Catholic and Protestant, to look again at eschatology—that is, at the
doctrine of the “last things.” For very significant sectors of contemporary
theology, eschatology proved a valuable starting point, rather than an
appendix to the rest of theology. Second, Teilhard’s emphasis on the
continuing evolutionary process, and on our conscious participation in it,
encouraged other theologians to explore the field of human participation in
the divine purposes, and to look upon humanity as an active agent in the
shaping of history. Finally, his this-worldly mysticism inspired many to
relate their devotional life to their political activism.
    Henri de Lubac (1896–1991), also a French Jesuit and a friend of
Teilhard’s, is another example of the theology that was developing within
the Roman Catholic Church, even against the wishes of the Vatican, during
the first half of the twentieth century. Together with Jean Daniélou (1905–
1974), de Lubac edited a voluminous series of ancient Christian writings.
This sound, scholarly series was also intended for modern audiences, and
thus reflected de Lubac’s concern that the modern world and Christian
tradition be combined in a dynamic and creative tension. He felt that in
recent years the church had narrowed its understanding of tradition, and had
therefore lost a great deal of the dynamism of the entire Christian tradition.
When compared with the breadth and catholicity of the earlier tradition, the
Catholic theology of his time appeared narrow and stale. Such views,
however, were not well received in Rome, and by mid-century he too was
silenced. After the ban was lifted, his fellow Jesuits asked him to write a
critical study of the work and thought of Teilhard de Chardin, evaluating it
in the light of Catholic tradition. He published the first volume of this
project in French in 1962. Rome reacted against it immediately, stopping
the project and forbidding the republication and translation of the volume
already published.
    De Lubac was not as inclined to grand cosmic views as was Teilhard;
and this, together with his profound knowledge of early Christian tradition,
resulted in his having greater impact on Catholic theology. But he too
believed that all of humanity has a single goal, and that the whole of history
can best be understood from the vantage point of this goal, which is none
other than Jesus Christ. The church—not as a juridical organization but as
the mystical body of Christ—is a sacrament in the midst of the world.
Although silenced by Rome, de Lubac was much admired by many
theologians and progressive bishops, and he was one of the periti—that is,
experts—whose participation in the Second Vatican Council did much to
influence the outcome of that assembly. His very notion of the church as a
sacrament in the world stands at the root of the Council’s concern that its
documents reflect a church open to the world.
    Yves Congar (1904–1995), another of the periti at the Second Vatican
Council, represented a similar orientation. He had direct personal
experience of the harshness of modern life, for in 1939 he had been drafted
into the French army, and he was a prisoner of war in Germany from 1940
to 1945. A Dominican, he later became director of the Dominican
monastery in Strasbourg. Like de Lubac, he was convinced that in response
to controversy the church had narrowed its own tradition, and thus denied
much of the richness of that tradition. He was particularly concerned with
the church’s self-understanding, and therefore felt the need to go beyond the
juridical and hierarchical view of the church that prevailed at his time. For
this he drew inspiration from earlier ecclesiologies, in which the image of
“people of God” was dominant, and in which the laity were the focus of
attention. From that perspective, he showed an openness to other Christians
that was unusual among Catholics in the earlier part of the century. Like
Teilhard and de Lubac, for a time he was silenced by Rome. But still his
influence was widespread, and when the Second Vatican Council was
convened he was appointed one of its theological mentors. His influence on
that assembly can be seen particularly in the documents on the nature of the
church, on ecumenism, and on the church in the modern world.
    Probably the most influential Catholic theologian of the twentieth
century was the Jesuit Karl Rahner (1904–1984), another of the periti at the
Second Vatican Council. The son of a German high school teacher, and one
of seven siblings—his brother Hugo was also a well-known Jesuit
theologian—Rahner wrote more than three thousand books and articles.
These deal with the most technical matters in theology as well as with
everyday questions, such as “Why do we pray at night?” In all these cases,
however, Rahner’s method was similar: he affirmed both tradition and the
modern world, and thus asked of tradition very different questions than
were usually asked of it. His purpose was not to solve the mystery of the
universe, but rather to clarify the mysterious nature of existence, to bring
mystery back to the heart of everyday life. Philosophically, he drew both
from Thomas Aquinas and from his professor Martin Heidegger, one of the
foremost proponents of existentialism. But he was not particularly
interested in philosophy except inasmuch as it helped to clarify Christian
teaching. Also, he produced very little popular work, but was content to
write mostly for theologians, calling them to a new openness and a renewed
interpretation of tradition. He repeatedly offered interpretations of tradition
that were at variance with commonly held views, but he was never silenced
by Rome, as his French counterparts had been. Although his influence, both
direct and indirect, can be seen in practically all the documents of the
Second Vatican Council, it is probably in the understanding of the role of
the episcopacy that he had the greatest impact. Indeed, for generations the
tendency within Roman Catholicism had been toward greater centralization
in Rome, after the model of a monarchical government. Rahner explored
the notion of the episcopate and, without rejecting Roman primacy,
underlined the collegial nature of the episcopacy. This in turn meant that the
church could be truly catholic—adapting itself to each culture, and not
necessarily taking Roman and Western European perspectives as the
standards of truth. Such a view of catholicity and collegiality forms the
foundation of the Council’s decisions, not only with reference to the
episcopacy itself, but also with reference to the use of the vernacular and
the adaptation of the liturgy to various cultures and conditions. Rahner’s
judicious combination of sound theological scholarship. The retrieval and
reinterpretation of tradition, and an openness to ask new questions of that
tradition also served as a model for more radical theologies to which we
shall return in another chapter—in particular, Latin American theologies of
liberation.
    After centuries of refusing to deal with the challenges of the modern
world by any means besides confrontation and condemnation, during the
latter half of the twentieth century, Roman Catholicism opened up to a
dialogue with that world. As a result of that dialogue, Catholics as well as
Protestants and even non-Christians were surprised to find in the Catholic
Church an energy that few suspected it had. Long before the Second
Vatican Council, theologians whom Rome viewed with mistrust were
paving the way for this unexpected development.
    Parallel to the theological renewal that first led to the Second Vatican
Council, and then resulted from it, there was also a renewal of Roman
Catholic piety. While this was true in various circles and many ways, two
people were singular examples of this renewal taking place: Mother Teresa
of Calcutta and Henri Nouwen. Mother Teresa (1910–1997), a native of
Albania, devoted her life to serving the sick and the destitute in Calcutta,
where she established the Missionaries of Charity. Her work won her praise
and admiration throughout the world, and inspired many to follow a similar
path. Henri Nouwen (1932–1996) was a Dutch priest who freely expressed
the joy and the agonies of his inner life—both trusting God entirely, and
hesitating to trust. After teaching at Harvard, Notre Dame, and Yale, he
devoted the rest of his life to the service of people with disabilities, first in
France and then in Canada. His writings, widely read by both Catholics and
Protestants, were major factors in the emphasis on spirituality that marked
the life of many believers late in the twentieth century and early in the
twenty-first.
   By the last decades of the twentieth century, it was clear that Roman
Catholicism, while declining in the traditionally Catholic countries in
Europe, was gaining strength elsewhere. Catholic vitality and theological
leadership was no longer limited to North Atlantic or European men but
also included women, minorities in the North Atlantic, and believers in
Latin America, Asia, and Africa. In the latter regions, the number of
Catholic believers continued to grow, with the result that, in spite of its
numeric decline in Europe, by 2010 Catholicism had over a billion
adherents. For Roman Catholicism—as was true for Christianity in general
—a crisis occurring at its traditional centers was paralleled with
unprecedented growth, creativity, and vitality at the periphery. Roman
Catholicism, like Christianity as a whole, was moving beyond Christendom.
                                   35

    Crisis at the Center: Protestantism in
                    Europe


   Our having grown up forces us to realize where we stand before God.
   God is teaching us to live as those who can manage without him.


DIETRICH BONHOEFFER
                WORLD WAR I AND ITS AFTERMATH
The upheavals of the first half of the twentieth century were felt most
strongly in Europe. The continent had been the cradle of much of the
optimistic philosophy and theology of the nineteenth century (see Chapter
31). It had dreamt that under its leadership humankind would see a new day.
It had convinced itself that its colonial ventures were a vast altruistic
enterprise for the good of the world. European Protestantism had been far
more immersed in this illusion than its Catholic counterpart, for
Catholicism during the nineteenth century had reacted to the modern world
with wholesale condemnation (see Chapter 32), while Protestant liberalism
had practically capitulated before the new age. Therefore, when the two
world wars and the events surrounding them gave the lie to the false dreams
of the nineteenth century, Protestant liberalism was shaken to its very
foundations. During the nineteenth century, partially as a result of the
failure of Catholicism to respond creatively to the challenges of the modern
world, skepticism and secularism had become common in France. In the
twentieth century, partially as a result of the failure of liberalism and its
optimistic hopes, those areas where Protestantism had been traditionally
strong—Germany, Scandinavia, and Great Britain—also witnessed a
decided increase in skepticism and secularism. By the middle of the
century, it was clear that northern Europe was no longer a stronghold of
Protestantism and that other areas of the world had usurped its position of
leadership in Protestantism. Thus, Europe, formerly the center of
Christendom, was moving “beyond Christendom.”
    By the time war broke out in 1914, many Christian leaders were aware
of the increasing tension in Europe, and had taken measures seeking to use
the international connections of the churches in order to avert war. When
this failed, some of these Christians refused to be carried by nationalist
passions, and sought to make the church an instrument of reconciliation. A
leader in these efforts was Nathan Söderblom (1866–1931), Lutheran
archbishop of Uppsala since 1914, who used his contacts on both sides of
the conflict to call for demonstrations of the universal and supranational
character of the Christian communion. After the war, his efforts and
contacts, as well as his unblemished record as a peacemaker, made him one
of the leaders of the early ecumenical movement.
    But Protestantism was sorely lacking in a theology that could help it
understand the events of the times, and to respond to them. Liberalism, with
its optimistic view of human nature and capabilities, had no word for the
situation. Söderblom and others in Scandinavia began to deal with its
deficiency through a revival of studies on Luther and his theology. During
the previous century, German liberal scholarship had depicted Luther as
both the forerunner of liberalism and the embodiment of the German soul.
Now other scholars, first in Scandinavia and then also in Germany, took a
second look at Luther’s theology, and discovered there much that was not in
agreement with the interpretations of the previous century. Significant
landmarks in this movement were Gustav Aulén’s Christus Victor and
Anders Nygren’s Agape and Eros. Both works are characterized by a sense
of the power of evil and of the unmerited grace of God, which contradicted
much of what had been said in the previous generation.
    The most significant theological response to the challenges of the times,
however, was the work of Karl Barth (1886–1968). The son of a Swiss
Reformed pastor, Barth had been so intrigued by his confirmation classes in
1901 and 1902 that he decided to study theology. By the time he was ready
to begin his theological studies, his father was a professor of church history
and New Testament at Bern, and it was under his direction that young Barth
planned his studies. After some time at Bern, and an uneventful semester at
Tübingen, he went to Berlin, where he was fascinated by Adolf von
Harnack and his grasp of the history of doctrine. Later, as a student in
Marburg, he was captivated by the writings of both Kant and
Schleiermacher. It was also there that he met Eduard Thurneysen, a fellow
student who would become his closest friend throughout his career. Finally,
seemingly well equipped with the best liberal theology of his time, Barth
became a pastor, first in Geneva—where he took the opportunity for a
careful reading of Calvin’s Institutes—and then in the Swiss village of
Safenwil.
    Safenwil in 1911 was a parish of peasants and laborers, and Barth
became interested in their struggle for better living conditions. Soon he was
so involved in the social issues of his parish that he read theology only
when preparing sermons or lectures. He became a Social Democrat—a
party he joined in 1915—and decided that this movement was, even
unknowingly, God’s instrument for the establishment of the Kingdom. After
all, he felt, Jesus had not come to found a new religion, but to begin a new
world, and the Social Democrats were closer to that purpose than a dormant
church that was content with its preaching and worship. Then the war
shattered both his political hopes and his theology. The new world that the
Social Democrats had promised was not forthcoming—at least not in the
near future—and the optimism of his liberal mentors seemed out of place in
a Europe torn by war. In a conversation with Thurneysen in 1916, the two
friends decided that it was time to do theology on a different basis, and that
the best way to do this was by returning to the text of Scripture. The next
morning, Barth undertook a study of Romans that would shake the
theological world.
    Barth’s Commentary on Romans, originally written for his own use and
for a small circle of friends, was published in 1919. There, he insisted on
the need to return to faithful exegesis rather than systematic constructions.
The God of Scripture—he declared—is transcendent, never an object of
human manipulation, and the Spirit that works in us is never something that
we possess, but is always and repeatedly a gift of God. Barth also reacted
against the religious subjectivism that he had learned from many of his
teachers. In this regard, he declared that in order to be saved one must be
free of such individual concern, and be a member of the body of Christ, the
new humanity.
   While readers in Germany and Switzerland poured a praise not always
to his liking on his Commentary on Romans, Barth was pursuing further
readings that convinced him that he had not gone far enough in that book.
Particularly, he felt that he had not sufficiently underscored the otherness of
God. He had spoken of transcendence; but now he feared that he had not yet
escaped from the liberal and Romantic tendency to find God in the best of
human nature. Also, he had not sufficiently stressed the contrast between
the Kingdom of God and all human projects. He was now convinced that
the Kingdom is an eschatological reality, one that arises from the Wholly
Other, and is not of human construction. This led him to renounce the
theology that had led him to join the Social Democrats. Although still a
socialist, and still convinced that Christians ought to strive for justice and
equality, he now insisted that none of these projects ought to be confused
with the eschatological Kingdom of God.
   Barth had just finished the second—and radically revised—edition of his
Commentary on Romans when he left Safenwil in order to begin a teaching
career in Göttingen—a career that he would later continue in Münster,
Bonn, and finally in Basel. Kierkegaard’s influence is clearly discernible in
the second edition of Barth’s Commentary on Romans—particularly in his
insistence on the unsurmountable gap between time and eternity, between
human achievement and divine action. It has also been said that Barth’s
second edition was his version of Kierkegaard’s attack upon Christendom.
By the time he began his teaching career, Barth was being credited with
having begun a new theological school that some would call dialectical
theology, others crisis theology, and still others neo-orthodoxy. This was a
theology of a God who is never ours, but always stands over against us;
whose word is at the same time both yes and no; whose presence brings, not
ease and inspiration to our efforts, but crisis. Around him gathered a
number of theologians of stature: his fellow Reformed Emil Brunner,
Lutheran pastor Friedrich Gogarten, and New Testament scholar Rudolf
Bultmann. In 1922, Barth, Gogarten, Thurneysen, and others founded the
theological journal Zwischen den Zeiten (Between the Times) to which
Brunner and Bultmann also contributed. Soon, however, Bultmann and
Gogarten drifted away from the group, which they considered too
traditional in its approach to theology and not sufficiently engaged with the
questions of modern doubt. Later, Brunner and Barth also parted company
over the issue of the relationship between nature and grace—while Brunner
felt that there must be in humans a “point of contact” for the action of
grace, Barth insisted that this would lead to a reintroduction of natural
theology, and that in any case it is grace that creates its own “point of
contact.”
    Meanwhile, Barth had continued his theological pilgrimage. In 1927, he
published the first volume of a projected Christian Dogmatics, wherein he
declared that the object of theology is not the Christian faith, as
Schleiermacher and others had made it appear, but the Word of God. The
tone of his work had also changed, for in the Commentary on Romans he
had been the prophet showing the error of old ways, and in Christian
Dogmatics he was the scholar trying to offer an alternative systematic
theology. The theology of crisis had thus become a theology of the Word of
God.
    But this entire project then became nothing more than a false start.
Through a study of Anselm of Canterbury, and then of nineteenth-century
Protestant theology, Barth became convinced that the Christian Dogmatics
granted too much to philosophy. There, he had proposed that theology
answers our deepest existential questions;, and had used existentialist
philosophy as the framework on which theology was built. Now he declared
that the Word of God provides not only the answers but also the questions.
Sin, for instance, is not something we know by nature, and to which the
gospel responds. What convicts us of sin is God’s word of grace. Without
knowing that word, we know neither grace nor sin. This new perspective
led Barth to begin his great systematic work once again, this time stressing
the ecclesiastical grounding of theology with the very title Church
Dogmatics. The thirteen volumes of this work, which he never completed,
were published between 1932 and 1967.
    Church Dogmatics is unquestionably the great theological monument of
the twentieth century. At a time when many felt that theological systems
were a matter of the past, and that theology could at best consist of
monographs, Barth wrote a work worthy of the best eras of theological
scholarship. On reading it, one immediately notices his profound
acquaintance with earlier theological traditions, which he constantly brings
to bear. But one is also aware of the inner coherence of the entire work,
which from beginning to end—and over a period of almost four decades of
writing—is true to itself. There are shifting emphases in it, but no new
starts. Most remarkable of all is Barth’s own freedom and critical stance
toward the entire task of theology, which he never confused with the Word
of God. Indeed, he insisted, theology, no matter how true or correct, always
remains a human endeavor, and therefore must always be seen with a
combination of freedom, joy, and even humor.

                          RENEWED CONFLICTS
While Barth was preparing the first volume of his Church Dogmatics,
ominous events were taking shape in Germany: Hitler and the Nazi party
were rising to power. In 1933, the Vatican and the Third Reich signed a
concordat. Protestant liberals had no theological tools with which to
respond critically to this new challenge. Indeed, many of them had declared
that they believed in the perfectibility of the human race, and this was
precisely what Hitler proclaimed. They had also tended to confuse the
gospel with German culture, and the Nazi claim that Germany was called to
civilize the world was echoed at many Protestant pulpits and academic
chairs. Hitler’s own program included the unification of all Protestant
churches in Germany, and then using them in order to preach his message
of German racial superiority, and of a divinely given mission. Thus arose
the German Christians, which combined traditional Christian beliefs,
usually as they had been reinterpreted by liberalism, with notions of racial
superiority and German nationalism. Part of their program was to
reinterpret Christianity in terms of opposition to Judaism, thus contributing
to the anti-Semitic policies of the Reich. In 1933, following the directions
of the government, a united German Evangelical Church was formed. When
its presiding bishop showed himself unwilling to obey the Reich in all
matters, he was deposed and another named in his place. In 1934, several
professors of theology, including Barth and Bultmann, signed a protest
against the directions the united church was taking. Then, a few days later,
both Lutheran and Reformed Christian leaders from all over Germany,
gathered at Barmen for what they called a “witnessing synod,” and issued
the Barmen Declaration, which became the foundational document for the
Confessing Church, a body that opposed Hitler’s policies in the name of the
gospel. The Barmen Declaration rejected “the false doctrine, that the church
ought to accept as the basis for its message, besides and apart from the one
Word of God, other events and powers, figures or truths, as if they were
God’s revelation.” And it called all Christians in Germany to test its words
against the Word of God, and to accept them only if they found it consistent
with that Word.
    The Third Reich’s reaction was not slow in coming. Dr. Martin
Niemöller, a pastor in Berlin and an outspoken critic of the government,
was arrested and would remain in prison for eight years. Almost all pastors
critical of the government were drafted into the army and sent to the
battlefront. All professors in German universities were required to sign a
statement of unconditional support of the Reich. Barth refused to sign and
returned to Switzerland, where he taught in Basel until his retirement.
    Most notable among those who suffered under Hitler’s regime was
young theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer (1906–1945), who was a pastor in
London when the Confessing Church invited him to return to Germany and
head a clandestine seminary. His friends in England tried to dissuade him,
but he felt that this was a call that he must accept, and he returned to
Germany knowing that in doing so he was endangering his life. In 1937, he
published The Cost of Discipleship, in which he attempted to show the
significance of the Sermon on the Mount for contemporary living. That
same year his seminary was disbanded by direct order of the Reich. In spite
of this order, Bonheoeffer gathered two groups of students for continued
theological instruction. The experiences of these years of shared community
in obedience and danger are reflected in his book on Life Together,
published in 1939. By then, war was about to explode. Bonhoeffer was on a
brief visit to London when friends from England and the United States
(where he had been a student years earlier) insisted that he not return to
Germany. But return he did. Back in Germany, he decided to accept an
invitation to spend a year in the United States. He had scarcely arrived,
however, when he decided that he had made a mistake, for his fellow
Germans would soon be forced to choose between patriotism and truth, and
he declared: “I know which of those alternatives I must choose; but I cannot
make that choice in security.”
    Bonhoeffer’s life back in Germany became increasingly difficult. In
1938, he was forbidden to live in Berlin. Two years later, his seminary was
closed by order of the Gestapo, and he was forbidden from publishing
anything or speaking in public. During the next three years, his involvement
in the underground against Hitler increased. Until then, he had been a
pacifist. But he came to the conclusion that such pacifism, leaving others to
make the difficult political and practical decisions, was a way of escaping
from his own responsibility. In a meeting with a friend in Sweden,
Bonhoeffer said that he was part of a conspiracy to assassinate Hitler. This
was not something he wanted to do, he said, but he felt that he had no other
choice.
    Bonhoeffer was arrested by the Gestapo in April 1943. While in prison,
and later in a concentration camp, Bonhoeffer won the respect of both
guards and fellow prisoners, whom he served as chaplain. He also carried
on correspondence with those outside, some of it censored by the
authorities and some smuggled out with the help of sympathetic guards. In
that correspondence, and in other papers he left behind, he showed that he
was grappling with new ideas, some of which have tantalized later
generations. For instance, he spoke of the world “coming of age,” and of
God’s presence in this world being much like that of a wise parent, who
recedes into the background as a child grows. It was in this connection that
he criticized Barth, whom he greatly admired, for having moved into what
he called a “positivism of revelation,” as if revelation let us know more than
it actually does. But on other matters he took his cue from Barth, and tried
to apply Barth’s principles in daring fashion. For instance, Barth had
declared that religion is a human effort by which we seek to hide from God,
and on this basis Bonhoeffer spoke of a “religionless Christianity,” while he
groped for the future shape of such Christianity. Later generations would
read these lines and feel compelled to follow Bonhoeffer’s suggestions in a
number of divergent ways.
    As the Allied troops advanced, and defeat was unavoidable, the Third
Reich moved to eliminate those it considered its worst enemies. Bonhoeffer
was among them. After a hasty court martial, he was condemned to death.
The prison doctor later told of seeing him kneeling in his cell, praying in
preparation for his death. On April 9, 1945, two years and four days after
his arrest, Dietrich Bonhoeffer was hanged. A few days later, Allied troops
captured the prison where he had been executed.

                             AFTER THE WAR
One result of the war was that vast areas of Eastern and central Europe fell
under Soviet rule. Most of these lands were predominantly Catholic, but in
all of them there were significant Protestant minorities. The portion of
Germany that fell under Soviet control was the cradle of Protestantism,
where the population was overwhelmingly Protestant. This led both to
difficulties between Protestants and Communist regimes, and to an
increased dialogue between Marxists and Protestants. The nature of the
relations between the state and the church varied from country to country,
and from time to time. Orthodox Marxist doctrine certainly saw Christianity
as an enemy, but some Communist leaders followed a policy of open
opposition to the church, while others opted for benign neglect based on the
conviction that religious faith was a matter of the past and would simply
disappear. In Czechoslovakia and Hungary, the state continued its
traditional policy of supporting the churches with public funds. In East
Germany, on the other hand, Christians were subject to serious civil
restrictions that prevented them from pursuing an education or holding
positions of significant responsibility.
    In Czechoslovakia, the Marxist-Christian dialogue was associated with
the name of Joseph Hromádka, dean of the Comenius Faculty of Theology
in Prague. In order to understand his attitude, and that of other Protestants
in Czechoslovakia, one must remember that this is the land of Huss, and
also the land where the Thirty Years’ War caused greatest devastation. Ever
since, Protestants in that land have seen Catholics as their oppressors.
Therefore, when the Communist regime declared that all churches would
have equal standing before the government, Czech Protestants saw in this
an act of liberation. The Vatican’s opposition to the new regime in
Czechoslovakia was seen as an attempt to regain the privileges that
Catholics had lost, and therefore as a move to oppress them again. Also,
from the times of the Hussite struggles against foreign invaders, Czechs had
been convinced that Christian faith must not be something private, but must
also have an impact on society, leading it to greater justice. For these
reasons, Hromádka and his followers responded positively to the Marxist
regime, while not abandoning their faith. Even before World War II,
Hromádka had spoken of the possibility that Russian Communism might be
the beginning of a new era in world history, one where issues of social
justice would be paramount. As early as 1933, he had also warned of the
dangers of Nazism. After the German invasion of his homeland, he fled to
the United States, where he taught at Princeton Theological Seminary for
eight years. At that time, he felt confirmed in his earlier belief that much of
what passed for Christianity in the United States was little more than the
justification of liberal democracy and capitalism. Furthermore, he was
convinced that Christians should not be led astray by Marxist atheism, for
the God whose existence the Marxists deny is no more than a fiction. The
true God of Scripture and of Christian faith is not that God, but is One who
is not touched by Marxism’s futile atheism. There is indeed a radical
difference between Marxism and Christianity. But the church must be
careful not to confuse that difference with the polarization of the world due
to the Cold War. Christians must be critical of the Marxist state; but they
must not be critical in a fashion that affirms the continuation of the
injustices of the capitalist order—or of that which existed in
Czechoslovakia before the war.
    Elsewhere in Europe, a lively dialogue was taking place between
Christians and Marxists. Often, the Marxist participants in this dialogue
were not orthodox Marxist-Leninists, but rather revisionists who, while
agreeing with the fundamental elements in Marx’s analysis of history and
society, wished to pursue those insights their own way. A leader in this
movement was Ernst Bloch, a Marxist philosopher who agreed with Marx
that religion—and particularly Christianity in most of its history—has been
used as an instrument of oppression. But, taking his cue from the young
Marx himself, Bloch saw in early Christianity a movement of protest
against oppression, and then went on to reinterpret Christian doctrines and
biblical stories through that lens. For him, this value lies in the message of
hope. The “principle of hope” was early Christianity’s most significant
contribution to human history. And this is of paramount importance, for—
from the perspective of hope—humans are not determined by their past, but
rather by their future. Such views, as well as those of other Marxist
revisionists, paved the way for a dialogue that continued into the last
decades of the twentieth century. This dialogue—and particularly Bloch’s
work—contributed to one of the main characteristics of Protestant theology
in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, namely, an emphasis
on hope and on eschatology as a basic theme for Christian theology. A
leader in this movement was Jürgen Moltmann, who was also influenced by
a number of Third-World theologians, and whose books Theology of Hope
and The Crucified God have been hailed as initiating a new era in European
theology. Moltmann argues that hope is the central tenet of biblical faith.
God is not yet finished with the world. Our God, Moltmann argues, meets
us and calls us from the future. Hope for the “last things” ought not be the
last chapter, but the first, of Christian theology. This is not a private,
individualistic hope, but is the hope for a new order. Thus, a theology of
hope must not lead the faithful to passive waiting for the future, but rather
to join those struggles against poverty and oppression that signal God’s
future.
    Meanwhile, in those areas of Western Europe that remained free of
Soviet control, the process of secularization accelerated. Twenty years after
the war, in traditionally Protestant areas such as Scandinavia, West
Germany, and Great Britain, church attendance and participation had
declined to the point that only a small minority—in some cases fewer than
10 percent—of the population had any significant contact with any form of
organized Christianity. In those areas, the issue that most concerned
Christian leaders and theologians was the relationship between Christianity
and the modern, highly secular view of the world—an issue Bonhoeffer had
been grappling with in prison.
    One of the most influential answers to this question—at least for a time
(it was soon surpassed by other developments) was offered by Rudolf
Bultmann in an essay published during World War II on The New Testament
and Mythology. There, Bultmann argues that the message of the New
Testament is couched in myth, and that for it to be heard today it must be
“demythologized.” This is important, not because without it faith would be
impossible—people can force themselves to believe whatever they wish, no
matter how irrational—but rather because without that demythologizing,
faith is radically misunderstood. Faith is not an effort of the will to believe
the unbelievable. The call of the New Testament to faith is not heard when
one confuses it with the call to accept its myths. Myth is every attempt to
express in images that which transcends this world. But in the New
Testament, besides this basic myth, there is also a mythological worldview,
one in which God and other supernatural forces intervene, and one in which
the universe is seen as existing on three tiers, with heaven above and hell
below. The modern world can no longer accept the notion of a world open
to supernatural interventions, nor does it view earth as hanging between hell
and heaven. All this, as well as the basic attempt to speak of God in human
terms, must be demythologized.
    Bultmann’s method of understanding the New Testament drew its
inspiration from existentialist philosopher Martin Heidegger. This aspect of
his program, however, was not accepted as widely as his call for
demythologization. Whatever the content of a new understanding of the
New Testament may be, argue those who defend the program, it is clear that
modern people no longer think in terms of a world open to supernatural
intervention, and that therefore the stories of the New Testament, couched
as they are in such terms, are an obstacle to faith. More than twenty years
after the publication of Bultmann’s essay, Anglican bishop John A.T.
Robinson’s Honest to God, which caused widespread debate and comment,
was an attempt to popularize Bultmann’s views—together with those of
Bonhoeffer and Paul Tillich.
    By the end of the century, however, a new dimension had been added to
theological discussion, namely the conviction on the part of many that
modernity was coming to a close. For over two centuries, Christian
theology had been dominated by the issue of modernity—the Roman
Catholic Church at first reacting against it, then finally accepting it, and the
majority of Protestant theologians claiming it or at least accepting its main
tenets as given truth. Modernity had provided the basis for much of the
colonial enterprise, for it was thanks to their modern armies and their
modern machinery that the colonial powers were able to impose their will
on the rest of the world. Now that colonialism seemed to be a matter of the
past, the same was beginning to be true of modernity. In Europe and
elsewhere, there was a growing conviction that notions such as objectivity
and universality, and the view of the world as a closed entity guided by
mechanistic principles—concepts that had marked much of modernity’s
claim in the human mind—were not as strong as they had once seemed. As
we shall see, such views were also in the background of the contextual
theologies that were developing throughout the world at the same time.

                   AT THE TURN OF THE CENTURY
The last decade of the twentieth century saw momentous changes in the
political configuration of Europe. The decade began with the collapse of the
Soviet Union and the dismemberment of its empire in Eastern Europe.
Shortly thereafter, in November of 1993, the European Union was born; it
would come to comprise most of the nations of Western Europe. While the
latter event did not have the great impact on the life of the churches that the
former did, the two together brought radical changes to European
Protestantism. In Eastern Europe, although it was the Orthodox Churches
that were most affected by the fall of Communism, the new order brought
significant changes among Protestants, and impelled the churches to take on
new roles. In Germany, for instance, the churches had been reduced to a
defensive posture. To them, it was a great victory when, in 1978, the
Communist government in East Germany reached an agreement with the
churches, promising to put an end to discrimination against Christian
children and youth, allowing regional and national mass gatherings of
believers, and authorizing the building of a number of churches. In 1983,
the government and the churches—including Roman Catholics—joined in
an uneasy alliance for the celebration of the fifth centennial of Luther’s
birth. But this changed entirely with the fall of the Berlin wall and the
reunification of Germany. In East Germany, much of the conspiracy to
overthrow the regime and reunite the nation was led by Reformed and
Lutheran pastors and lay leaders, several of whom came to occupy
important positions in the effort to rebuild the nation after reunification.
    Similar events occurred in other lands. In Hungary, Reformed pastor
Laszlo Tokes played a role in resistance to the existing order, similar to the
role of Lech Walesa in Poland. There, as well as in Poland and Romania,
Reformed pastors and other leaders made important contributions in the
framing of new constitutions. In all this process, the churches came to be
seen as more relevant to the life of the people than they had been for
decades. On the other hand, in Czechoslovakia a synod of the Silesian
Lutheran Church deposed its bishop on the grounds of having collaborated
with the regime that had now fallen. When Yugoslavia broke into pieces, so
did the Reformed Christian Church in that nation.
    In Western Europe, on the other hand, the process of secularization that
had begun much earlier continued unabated, and even accelerated—perhaps
fostered by an optimism about human abilities similar to that enjoyed in the
nineteenth century. But this should not be interpreted to mean that the
churches had lost all vitality, or that theological discussions on the meaning
of secularism were their sole occupation. On the contrary, Western
European Protestants, whose numbers had been drastically reduced,
continued being an active leaven in their society, and took a place of
leadership in the movement to stop the arms race, in issues of international
justice, and in service to those disenfranchised or uprooted by industrial
development and its consequences. In France, the Reformed Church of
France was born in 1936 out of a union of two Reformed bodies with
Methodists and Congregationalists. Throughout the twentieth century, and
into the twenty-first, this church showed great interest and success in
evangelistic work in heavily industrialized areas. Likewise, in West
Germany Protestant churches employed a staff of a hundred and thirty
thousand devoted to social assistance and relief, in both Germany itself and
abroad. Behind that movement stood millions of committed Christians for
whom the crucial question was not secularism, but obedience. When
conditions changed and Germany was reunited after almost half a century in
which the Communist regime had discouraged church attendance—
particularly among children and youth—almost two-thirds of the population
continued professing Christianity.
    Thus, while shaken by the momentous and even disastrous events of the
twentieth century, and in some places reduced to a minority of the
population, European Protestantism had not lost its vitality. European
churches continued serving the needy, calling for social justice, and
supporting other churches in poorer countries.But they were no longer the
dominant partners in such enterprises, for there were growing numbers who
felt that secular agencies could respond to human needs at least as well as
the churches. At the same time, large numbers of immigrants from former
European colonies in Africa and Asia resulted in an unprecedented rate of
growth of religions such as Islam, Buddhism, and Hinduism—to the extent
that in some areas in any given week there were more people worshiping in
mosques than in churches. Thus, by the second decade of the twenty-first
century, there was no doubt that Europe was moving beyond Christendom,
and becoming part of a much more complex world.
                                     36

 Crisis at the Center: Protestantism in the
                United States


   We acknowledge our Christian responsibilities of citizenship.
   Therefore, we must challenge the misplaced trust of the nation in
   economic and military might. . . . We must resist the temptation to
   make the nation and its institutions objects of near-religious loyalty.


CHICAGO DECLARATION
        FROM WORLD WAR I TO THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Although the United States was involved in World War I, that conflict did
not have the far-reaching consequences there that it had in Europe. The
main reason was that the United States did not enter the war until its final
stages, and even then its own lands were never the scene of battle. By and
large, most Americans were spared experiencing destruction and bloodshed
first hand, and the sufferings of the civilian population did not compare to
those of its counterpart in Europe. Although for a long time public opinion
was in favor of keeping the nation out of what appeared to be a European
conflict, once the United States declared war the entire affair was seen as a
matter of glory and honor. The churches, which until 1916 had supported
the peace movement, now joined in the rhetoric of war. Liberals and
fundamentalists spoke of the need to “save civilization,” and some among
the more radical fundamentalists began interpreting the events of the time
as the fulfillment of the prophecies of Daniel and Revelation. Except for the
traditionally pacifist denominations—such as the Mennonites and Quakers
—war fever and national chauvinism were the order of the day, to the point
that from some pulpits there was a call for the total extermination of the
German people in the name of God. Naturally, this created enormous
difficulties for those Americans of German descent, including Walter
Rauschenbusch, whose emphasis on the social dimensions of the faith,
known as the Social Gospel, elicited much opposition among more
conservative groups.
    The lack of critical reflection on the war and its causes had serious
consequences in the years following. First of all, President Woodrow
Wilson’s hope for a treaty in which the vanquished were treated fairly, in
order to avoid bitterness and renewed conflict, was shattered by both the
ambition of the victorious allies and the lack of support at home—thus
paving the way for the World War II. Second, the nation was so blinded by
the rhetoric of war that the United States never joined the League of
Nations, a forum for the resolution of international conflicts that was the
brainchild of the country’s own president. By that time many church leaders
were trying to undo the prejudice they had fostered during the war, but they
found that their call for love and understanding was not as well received as
their earlier message of hatred and prejudice.
    Partly as a result of the war, the United States entered another period of
isolationism, of fear of everything foreign, and of suppression of dissent.
During the decade of the 1920s, the Ku Klux Klan enjoyed a revival and an
unprecedented increase in its membership, in the North as well as in the
South, by adding Catholics and Jews to blacks as the great enemies of
American Christianity and democracy. In the Southwest, the Mexican
Revolution led many to flee that country and migrate to the United States,
as many had done earlier from Europe. But the race and religion of most of
these newer immigrants were not always welcome, and discrimination
against all persons of Mexican descent increased. Not a few religious
leaders and churches contributed to these prejudices. This was the time of
the “red scare,” the first of a series of witch hunts for radicals, Communists,
and subversives that swept the United States during the twentieth century.
Adding fuel to the fire and benefitting from it, many churches presented
themselves and the Christian faith as the main line of defense against the
“red threat.” Famous evangelist Billy Sunday declared that the deportation
of “radicals” was too easy a punishment, and one that would be costly to the
nation. Instead, he suggested, they should all be lined up and shot.
   Some Christians, mostly in the mainline denominations, organized
committees and campaigns to oppose such extremes. Often such
committees gained the approval of denominational headquarters. Thus
appeared a phenomenon that would characterize many mainline
denominations for decades: the split, in theology as well as in politics,
between a national leadership of liberal political and social tendencies, and
a significant portion of the rank and file who felt that their own
denominational leaders did not represent their views.
   The conflict between liberals and fundamentalists was exacerbated in
the post-war period. This was the time of the famous Scopes trial, which
symbolized the high point of the effort on the part of fundamentalists to ban
the teaching of the theory of evolution in public schools—an effort that in
some quarters would continue into the twenty-first century. Almost all
denominations were divided over the issue of fundamentalism—particularly
the inerrancy of Scripture, which by then had become the hallmark of
fundamentalist orthodoxy. In later years, these divisions would lead to open
schism. Thus, for instance, the work of the great defender of
fundamentalism among Northern Presbyterians, Princeton professor J.
Gresham Machen, led to the founding of a rival seminary and eventually of
the Orthodox Presbyterian Church (1936).
   During the 1920s, however, most Protestants were united in one great
cause: the prohibition of alcoholic beverages. Here was a cause that soon
enlisted the support both of liberals for whom it was a practical application
of the Social Gospel and of conservatives for whom it was an attempt to
return to the earlier times when the country had supposedly been purer.
Many linked drunkenness with all the evils they claimed had been brought
about by the immigration of Jews and Catholics, thus appealing to the same
prejudices against foreigners, Jews, and Catholics that fueled the growth of
the Ku Klux Klan. The campaign first succeeded in a number of state
legislatures, and then took on the federal Constitution. In 1919, by virtue of
the Eighteenth Amendment, prohibition became the law of the land, and it
remained so for more than a decade.
    But it was easier to pass the law than to enforce it. Business interests,
gangsters, and the drinking public in various ways collaborated to break the
law. To the evils of drinking were then added those of corruption,
encouraged by an illicit trade that had become inordinately profitable. By
the time the law was repealed, the notion that “one can’t legislate morality”
had become commonplace in American folklore. This notion, popular at
first among those liberals who had given up the ideal of prohibition, would
later be used also by those conservatives who opposed legislation against
racial segregation.
    Through the end of World War I and the following decade, the basic
American mood was one of high expectations. The war and its horrors were
dim memories from a distant land. In the United States, progress was still
the order of the day. In churches and pulpits, very little was heard of the
new theology that was developing in Europe, a theology that left behind the
optimism of earlier generations. What little was heard sounded alien, as
referring to a world far removed from the cheerful expectations of “the land
of the free and the home of the brave.” Then came the crash.

            THROUGH DEPRESSION AND WORLD WAR II
On October 24, 1929, panic gripped the New York Stock Exchange. With
short periods of slight recovery, the stock market continued dropping until
the middle of 1930. By then, most of the Western world was in the middle
of a great economic depression. One-fourth of the labor force in the United
States was unemployed. Britain and other nations had social security
systems and unemployment insurance. In the United States, fear of
socialism had prevented such measures, and therefore the unemployed
found themselves entirely on their own, or forced to seek charity from
relatives, friends, or churches. Soup kitchens and breadlines became
common sights in all major cities and many smaller towns. Runs on banks,
bankruptcies, and foreclosures reached a record high.
    At first, the nation faced the Great Depression with the optimism that
had characterized its handling of problems it had faced in earlier decades.
President Herbert Hoover and his cabinet continued to deny the existence of
a depression for months after the market had crashed. When they finally
admitted that there was a depression, they insisted that the American
economy was sufficiently sound to rebound by itself, and that the free
workings of the marketplace were the best way to ensure an economic
recovery. Although the president himself was a compassionate man who
suffered with the plight of the unemployed, there were around him those
who rejoiced in the hope that the Depression would break the labor unions.
Since their labor was no longer needed, thousands of Mexicans and
Mexican-Americans—many of them American citizens—were deported to
Mexico. When finally the government intervened to prevent further
bankruptcies in industry and commerce, comedian Will Rogers quipped that
money was being given to those at the top hoping that it would “trickle
down to the needy.”
    All this put a halt to the optimism of the previous decade. Although
historians have shown that the Depression that had hit the United States late
in the nineteenth century was much worse, the American public was much
less psychologically prepared for the Great Depression of the 1930s. An
entire generation that had never known want, and had been promised that
things would inevitably improve, suddenly saw its dreams shattered. At a
time when survival was at stake, facile promises of a rosy future seemed
shallow.
    It was then that less optimistic theologies began making an impact on
the United States. Karl Barth’s The Word of God and the Word of Man,
published in English just before the Crash, began to make sense to
Americans who were affected by the Great Depression in much the same
way that Barth and his generation had been affected by World War I (see
Chapter 35). The theology of the two Niebuhr brothers, Reinhold (1892–
1970) and H. Richard (1894–1962), came to the foreground. In 1929, H.
Richard Niebuhr published The Social Sources of Denominationalism, in
which he argued that denominationalism in the United States was an
adaptation of the gospel to the various racial and socioeconomic strata of
society, thus showing “the domination of class and self-preservative church
ethics over the ethics of the gospel.”20 His conclusion, made all the more
poignant because the world was approaching the worst war it had ever
known, was that “a Christianity which surrenders its leadership to the social
forces of national and economic life, offers no hope to the divided world.”21
In 1937, his book on The Kingdom of God in America further indicted this
sort of religion by declaring that in it “A God without wrath brought men
without sin into a Kingdom without judgment through the ministrations of a
Christ without a cross.”22
    Meanwhile, his brother Reinhold, who had been a parish minister in
Detroit until 1928, came to the conclusion that unbridled capitalism was
destructive, and in 1930 he and others joined in the Fellowship of Socialist
Christians. He was convinced that, left to its own devices, any society is
morally worse and more self-seeking than the sum of its members—a view
that he forcefully expounded in a book entitled Moral Man and Immoral
Society. In reaction against theological liberalism, he shared the doubts of
the neo-orthodox concerning human capabilities, and soon commented that
a more correct title for his book would have been “immoral man and even
more immoral society.” He meant that it was time Christians recovered a
balanced view of human nature, including both a deeper understanding of
sin and its ramifications, and a radical view of grace. This he attempted to
do in 1941 and 1943, in two volumes on The Nature and Destiny of Man.
    In 1934, thanks to the interest and support of Reinhold Niebuhr, German
theologian Paul Tillich joined him on the faculty of Union Theological
Seminary in New York. Hitler was rising to power in Germany, and Tillich,
a moderate socialist, was among the first people forced to leave the country.
He was not a neo-orthodox, but rather a theologian of culture who made use
of existentialist philosophy in order to interpret the gospel and its
relationship to the modern world. In contrast to Barth’s emphasis on the
Word of God as the starting point of theology, Tillich proposed what he
called the “method of correlation,” which consisted of examining the most
profound existential questions of modern people—particularly what he
called their “ultimate concern”—and then showing how the gospel responds
to them. His Systematic Theology dealt with the central themes of Christian
theology on the basis of this method. He was also a moderate socialist who
did apply a revised form of Marxist analysis to try to understand the
shortcomings of Western civilization. But after his move to the United
States, this particular element of his thought was overshadowed by his
interest in existentialism and in depth psychology.
    The Depression produced a critique of laissez faire economics in more
than just the theological faculties. The Federal Council of Churches
(founded in 1908 by thirty-three denominations, it later became the
National Council of Churches) went on record with the Methodist Church
in supporting government participation in economic planning and in
providing the means to safeguard the well being of the poor. This move,
made in 1932, was considered radical socialism, and a reaction was not
long in coming.
    People responded with a combination of traditional fundamentalism with
anti-socialist—and sometimes Fascist—political views. As the leadership of
various mainstream denominations moved toward the conviction that a
system of social security, unemployment insurance, and antitrust laws was
necessary, many in the rank and file moved in the opposite direction,
accusing that leadership of having been infiltrated by Communism. As the
war approached, a significant sector of this movement allied itself with
Fascism, and some of its leaders even declared that Christians ought to be
thankful for Adolf Hitler because he was halting the advance of socialism in
Europe. Seldom was any distinction made between Russian Communism
and other forms of socialism, and all were often declared to be equally
ungodly.
    The advent of President Roosevelt’s New Deal implemented many of the
policies that the “socialists” in the leadership of the churches had been
advocating. The very moderate steps taken at that time for providing relief
to the poor and security to the labor force have been credited by some
historians with saving the capitalist system in the United States. In any case,
although the New Deal did improve conditions for the poor, the economy
recovered slowly, and the last vestiges of the Depression disappeared only
in 1939, as the nation was once again preparing for the eventuality of war.
In a way, it was the war, and not the New Deal, that put an end to the Great
Depression.
    The nation was deeply divided over whether to enter the war which was
already raging in Europe and the Far East. Those who opposed the war did
so for a variety of reasons: some were Christians who still felt remorse for
the unrestrained militarism and nationalism exhibited during the previous
war; others were Fascists, or at least people whose fear of Communism
overrode every other consideration; some Americans of German and Italian
extraction felt spurred by a sense of allegiance to their ancestral lands;
isolationists simply believed that the nation should leave the rest of the
world to its own devices; and those who harbored racist and anti-Semitic
attitudes felt that the United States should do nothing to hinder Hitler’s
plans.
    In the end, however, the choice was made for them. That decision was
made by the attack on Pearl Harbor, on December 7, 1941. After that, the
national loyalty of any who opposed the war effort was questioned.
Japanese-Americans—including many whose families had been in the
United States for generations—were interned as potential spies. Sadly, the
churches said little, while smooth operators took over the property and
businesses of those interned. In general, perhaps chastised by their
wholesale support of the previous war, the churches spoke with moderation
during the conflict. They did support the war effort, provided chaplains for
the armed forces, and declared their abhorrence for the crimes of the Nazis.
But most leaders took care not to confuse Christianity with national pride. It
is significant that at the same time there were in Germany those who
insisted on a similar distinction, even at much higher cost. While the world
was torn apart by war, Christians living on both sides of the conflict were
seeking to build bridges. After the end of the conflict, such bridges would
bear fruit in the ecumenical movement (see Chapters 33 and 37).

                        THE POSTWAR DECADES
The war ended with the horrors of Hiroshima and the dawn of the nuclear
age. While at first there was much talk of the great promises of nuclear
power, its destructive effect was also evident. For the first time in history, a
generation grew up under the threat of the total annihilation of humankind
through nuclear holocaust. This was also the largest generation in American
history—the “baby boom” generation. In spite of the specter of nuclear war,
the postwar years were a period of unprecedented prosperity both for the
economy of the nation and for its churches. After long decades in which
financial depression and war had limited the availability of material goods,
there came a period of abundance. The industrial production of the nation
had accelerated during the war in order to provide the materials necessary
for the conflict. Now that production continued, resulting in the most
affluent consumer society the world had ever seen. Through the “G.I. Bill,”
the government provided financial support for veterans who wished to
obtain a college education or buy homes. There seemed to be opportunities
for financial and social advancement for any who were willing to take them,
although race did raise insurmountable barriers for many. Millions flocked
to new areas in search of those opportunities and, having found them,
settled in newly developed suburbia. Inner cities were progressively
abandoned by the affluent, and became more exclusively the abode of the
lower classes—particularly recent immigrants, poor blacks and other
minorities. In the mobile society of suburbia, the churches came to function
as an important source of both stability and social recognition.
    It was also the time of the Cold War. Hardly had the Axis been defeated,
when a new and more dangerous enemy appeared: Soviet Russia. This
enemy seemed all the more insidious inasmuch as it had sympathizers in the
Western world. In the United States, there was a renewed witch hunt for
Communists and socialists of every stripe. During the heyday of the
McCarthy Era (so-called because it was spear-headed by Senator Joseph
McCarthy), lack of church membership was viewed as a possible indication
of anti-American inclinations.
    For all these reasons, churches in suburbia grew rapidly. The 1950s and
early 1960s were the great age of U.S. church architecture, with affluent
congregations financing the building of vast and beautiful sanctuaries,
educational buildings, and other facilities. In 1950, the Billy Graham
Evangelistic Association was incorporated. It did more than simply
continue the old American tradition of revivals. With abundant financial
resources, it made use of the most advanced tools and techniques of
communication. Although basically conservative in its outlook, the Billy
Graham Association usually followed a policy of avoiding conflict with
Christians of other persuasions. American revivalist tradition soon spread
throughout the world, thus leaving its mark on every continent.
    All, however, was not well. By and large, the mainline churches had
abandoned the inner cities, now populated by the poor and by racial
minorities. In spite of valiant efforts on the part of some, mainline
Christianity had become so acculturated to the ethos of the newly affluent
suburban areas, that it lost contact both with the masses in the cities and
with its rural roots and constituencies. In rural areas, those who remained
members of their traditional denominations were increasingly suspicious of
the new leadership. In the cities, the Holiness churches sought to fill the
gap, but vast numbers of people lost all contact with any form of organized
Christianity. Twenty years after the great religious revival of the 1950s, the
call repeatedly went out for a renewed mission to the cities; but few had a
clear idea how to accomplish that mission. It was not until the 1980s that
there were signs of renewed religious vitality in the inner cities—and even
then, such signs were closely connected to either the arrival of new
immigrants and their churches, or to the return to the area of moderately
affluent churchgoers.
    Another feature of the post-war revival was an understanding of the
Christian faith as a path to inner peace and happiness. One of the most
popular religious authors of the time was Norman Vincent Peale, who
promoted faith and “positive thinking” as a route to mental health and
happiness. Historian Sydney E. Ahlstrom correctly speaks of the religiosity
of the times as “faith in faith,” which promised “peace of mind and
confident living.”23 This form of religiosity was well-suited to the times, for
it provided peace in the midst of a confusing world, said little about social
responsibilities, and did not risk conflict with those whose Cold War
mentality had made them Grand Inquisitors of American political opinion.
Ahlstrom’s conclusion is a serious indictment.
    There were, however, other factors at work within American society.
Although during the post-war years these new elements were not sufficient
to undo the prevailing optimistic mood of the nation, the next decades
would bring them to the foreground, and bring about radical changes in the
nation’s outlook.
    One of these factors was the Civil Rights movement, which had been
brewing for decades. The National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People (NAACP), founded in 1909, had won a number of court
battles long before the movement came to the foreground. Some in the
African-American community persisted in finding refuge in an
understanding of religion that promised otherworldly rewards, or gave them
a sense of belonging to the small body of the faithful, without challenging
the existing order. In some cases, this led to new religions with leaders who
declared themselves to be incarnations of the divine. Most successful of
these were Father Divinewho was also known as Reverend M.J. Divine
(1895–1965) and bishop Manuel Grace, or Sweet Daddy Grace (1881?–
1960). Black soldiers and sailors returning from the war—where they had
fought in military units that were separate from those of white soldiers—
found that the freedom for which they had fought abroad was left wanting
for them i.e., back in the U.S. Government responded by desegregating the
armed forces in 1949 and by the historic Supreme Court decision of 1952
that ordered the integration of public schools. A number of whites
supported the movement for integration, and in the early years their aid and
encouragement was valuable. The National Council of Churches (formerly
the Federal Council of Churches), as well as most major denominations,
also took a stance against segregation. But what made the movement
irresistible was the participation and leadership of African-Americans
themselves. Most of that leadership, until well into the 1960s, was drawn
from black clergy—most notable among them Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.,
during the war and post-war years, and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., in the
late 1950s and early 1960s. In an unprecedented manifestation of faith,
courage, and perseverance, blacks by the thousands showed their
determination to defy and unmask the oppressive laws and practices under
which they lived. Through sit-ins, arrests, beatings, and even death, in
places such as Montgomery and Selma, Alabama, they showed the world
that they were at least the moral equals of those who had repeatedly accused
them of being inferior. “We shall overcome” became both a cry of defiance
and a confession of faith.




  Most of the early leadership of the civil rights movement was drawn from the African-American
                                                 clergy.

   The Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), which Dr. King
founded, along with a number of other Christian organizations that
promoted nonviolence, did not suffice to channel all the frustration and
anger that had accumulated in the black community. For several decades,
more militant blacks had seen in Islam a religion not dominated by whites.
Thus the Black Muslims and several similar movements were born. Others,
particularly in the crowded ghettoes of cities such as New York and Los
Angeles, vented their anger through riots—of which the most famous was
the 1965 riot in the Watts area of Los Angeles. By the middle of the decade,
blacks had come to the conclusion that they would not attain full rights until
they had their just measure of power. Thus, the cry of “black power” arose
—a cry often misinterpreted to mean that blacks intended to become
masters over whites.
    At the same time, due partly to its Christian inspiration, Dr. King’s
movement was branching out into other concerns that were not strictly
racial. He and several other members of the SCLC became convinced that
their struggle was against injustice of every sort. It was the time of the war
in Southeast Asia, and Dr. King began criticizing the government’s policies
in the region, both because it was clear that the Selective Service System
discriminated against blacks and other minorities as well as against the
poor, and because he was convinced that the United States was perpetrating
in Southeast Asia an injustice similar to what had been perpetrated against
blacks at home. In the United States itself, Dr. King now felt that the
struggle must involve all poor people of whatever race. He was leading a
“poor people’s march” when he was assassinated in 1968.
    The entire movement found much of its inspiration in the Christian faith
of the black community. The old “spirituals” gained new meaning—or
rather, they were given once again the defiant meaning they had when first
sung in the old plantations. Churches became gathering and training places
for protesters. Preachers articulated the connection between the gospel and
the movement. Finally, a “black theology” emerged. This was a theology
that was both essentially orthodox and an affirmation of the black reality,
hope, and struggle. Its main figure was Union Theological Seminary
professor James Cone, who declared.
    At the same time, another movement, at first less publicized, was
gaining momentum. This was the feminist movement. For over a century,
women in the United States had been claiming their rights—often under the
leadership of Evangelical women. They had showed and strengthened their
political muscle in the abolitionist campaign, the Women’s Christian
Temperance Union, and their struggle for the right to vote—which they
finally won in 1920. A few churches did ordain women during the
nineteenth century. But as late as the middle of the twentieth century, most
denominations still did not allow the ordination of women, and all were
under the control of men. During the 1950s, in both the church and society
at large, and as the result of vast changes in the fiber of society, the
women’s movement gained in strength, experience, and solidarity. In the
churches, the battle was fought mainly on two fronts: women’s right to have
their call to ministry validated by ordination, and the critique of a theology
that had traditionally been done and dominated by males. By the mid-
1980s, most major Protestant denominations did ordain women; and in the
Roman Catholic Church, which refused to do so, there were strong and
vocal organizations campaigning against the ban on the ordination of
women. In the field of theology, a number of women—notably Presbyterian
Letty M. Russell and Roman Catholic Rosemary R. Reuther—proposed
what were essentially orthodox corrections to traditional male theology.
More radical were the views of Mary Daly, who declared herself a
“graduate” from the male-dominated church and called on her sisters to
await a “female incarnation of God.”
   While these movements were involving a significant number of blacks
and women, other international and national events were also shaping the
mind of the nation. Foremost among these was the war in Southeast Asia.
What started as a relatively small military involvement, in 1965 began
escalating into the longest war the United States had fought to date. It was a
war in which, with the hope of halting Communist advance, the United
States found itself supporting corrupt governments and unsuccessfully
using its enormous firepower against a nation much smaller than itself. The
media brought the atrocities of the war into every living room. Then it was
discovered that the public—and Congress—had been purposefully
misinformed on an incident in the Gulf of Tonkin which had precipitated
the escalation of the war. Protests, bitterness, and patriotic disappointment
swept the nation’s campuses. Eventually, armed force was used against
protesting students, resulting in fatalities at Kent State University and
Jackson State College. In the end, the United States, for the first time in its
history, lost a war. But more than that, it lost its innocence. The notion of
“the land of the free and the home of the brave,” exemplifying freedom and
justice at home, and defending it abroad, was brought into question. The
very prosperity that resulted from the war—followed as it was by a
significant recession—led some to wonder if the economic system on which
the nation was founded did not require the artificial stimulus of war. To this
were added all the questions and doubts kindled by the scandal that finally
led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
    While all these events were taking place in society at large, the churches
were also undergoing stress. The Protestant theological enterprise became
fragmented, with theologians pursuing radically different avenues. Attempts
to express the Christian message in secular terms led to the much-
publicized “theology of the death of God” in the 1960s. Taking a different
tack, Harvey Cox’s The Secular City sought to reinterpret the Christian
message in the light of an urban society, and to see the opportunities and
challenges that such a society offers. John Cobb and others set about
developing an understanding of the Christian faith on the basis of process
philosophy. Moltmann’s theology of hope found its counterparts on
American soil. And many white male theologians began studying black,
feminist, and Third World theologies for clues to a renewed understanding
of the biblical message. In this vast array of different and even divergent
theologies, there were three common themes: an orientation toward the
future, an interest in sociopolitical realities, and an attempt to bring these
two together. In other words, the dominant feature of these theologies taken
as a whole was the recovery of eschatology as a future hope that is active in
present-day social involvement. This was joined to a liturgical renewal that
began with historical inquiry into early Christian worship, and eventually
began emphasizing the eschatological dimension of worship and its social
relevance.
    This interest in social issues was further awakened by the international
contacts of the churches. Questions of hunger, political freedom, and
international justice became much more significant for those who were in
almost constant contact with Christians in other nations suffering under
those circumstances. Therefore, the National Council of Churches, the
World Council of Churches, and the boards of missions of practically every
major denomination were under attack by political conservatives who
accused them of being infiltrated by Communists, or at least of being dupes
for Communism.
    Meanwhile, the charismatic movement that began early in the century on
Azusa Street (see Chapter 27) had taken a new shape. During the first half
of the century, it had made an impact mostly among the lower classes and
the Holiness churches. Beginning in the late 1950s, it spread to suburbia
and within mainline denominations—including the Catholic Church. Most
of those involved in this new charismatic wave remained loyal members of
their churches; but at the same time there was a feeling of kinship among
charismatics of various denominations, thus giving rise to an ecumenical
movement that had little or no connection with organized conciliar
ecumenism. Although sometimes seen by critics as the religious counterpart
of the escape to suburbia, in truth the charismatic movement was quite
varied, including within its ranks both some who felt that their experience
with the Spirit should lead them away from the world, and those who felt
that it should lead them into daring social action.
    Evangelicalism was similarly divided. In the late 1970s and early 1980s,
its radio and television work grew enormously. Some television preachers
created and headed vast corporations for the furtherance of their work
which they organized into what many called their “ministries”—a
widespread phenomenon dubbed by critics “the electronic church.” A
common theme of many of these evangelists was the loss of traditional
values and the breakdown of society that they said would result from it—a
theme that had been heard since the time of Prohibition and its repeal.
Taking their cue from the earlier struggle against alcohol, some evangelical
leaders organized the “Moral Majority” to defend moral values and to
support conservative economic and social policies.
    On the other hand, growing numbers of evangelicals began to feel that
their faith led them to a commitment to critique the existing economic and
social order, both at home and abroad. Christians, they believed, must strive
against all forms of injustice, suffering, hunger, and oppression. In 1973, a
group of leaders of similar convictions joined in the “Chicago Declaration,”
which articulated what seemed to be the growing conviction of many
committed Christians in the United States:
   As evangelical Christians committed to the Lord Jesus Christ and the
   full authority of the Word of God, we affirm that God lays total claim
   upon the lives of his people. We cannot, therefore, separate our lives
   in Christ from the situation in which God has placed us in the United
   States and the world. . . .
          We acknowledge that God requires love. But we have not
   demonstrated the love of God to those suffering social abuses.
          We acknowledge that God requires justice. But we have not
   proclaimed or demonstrated his justice to an unjust American society.
   . . . Further, we have failed to condemn the exploitation of racism at
   home and abroad by our economic system. . . .
          We must attack the materialism of our culture and the
   maldistribution of the nation’s wealth and services. We recognize that
   as a nation we play a crucial role in the imbalance and injustice of
   international trade and development. Before God and a billion
   hungry neighbors, we must rethink our values. . . .
          We must resist the temptation to make the nation and its
   institutions objects of near-religious loyalty. . . .
          By this declaration, we endorse no political ideology or party,
   but call our nation’s leaders and people to that righteousness which
   exalts a nation.
          We make this declaration in the biblical hope that Christ is
   coming to consummate the Kingdom and we accept his claim on our
   total discipleship till he comes.26

    It is significant that this declaration was very similar to others being
made by Christians in varied situations throughout the world, often coming
out of entirely different theological backgrounds but reaching parallel
conclusions. From a worldwide perspective, it seemed that the church in the
United States was finally coming to grips with the challenges of a post-
Constantinian and an ecumenical age. It was also a church responding to the
new vision of the “space age”—an age when for the first time we viewed
the earth from space, and saw it as a fragile “spaceship” in which all must
either learn to live together or perish together.

                           A NEW CENTURY
In spite of dire apocalyptic predictions—including the soon forgotten scare
over the possible failure of all computers as a new millennium opened—the
twenty-first century opened on an optimistic note. The Cold War had ended,
and so had the proxy wars that the United States and the Soviet Union had
been waging in Central America and elsewhere. The demise of the Soviet
Union left the nation as the only superpower on earth. The previous decade
had seen years of unprecedented abundance.
    Then, on September 11, 2001, terror and tragedy struck. Suddenly a
nation that was still celebrating its victory over the Soviet Union found
itself facing the more insidious and frightening enemy of terror, which had
been espoused as the weapon of choice by small but fanatical groups within
the Muslim community. Although the attack on the twin towers of the
World Trade Center in New York City was in fact an attack on all of
civilization, the American press and the government almost immediately
turned it into an “attack on America,” and vowed revenge. Such revenge
came mostly in the form of the invasions first of Afghanistan, which was a
haven for radical Islamic terrorists, and then of Iraq, which was not. While
public sentiment rallied in opposition to terrorism, opinions were divided as
to the policies the government was following in implementation of that
opposition. The war in Iraq, which apparently had little to do with
terrorism, gave grounds for doubt and debate. Also, that war had cost the
United States the loss of much of the worldwide sympathy and support it
had gained as the world responded in horror to the events of 2001.
    In 2008, the country fell into its worst economic recession since the
historic Great Depression seven decades earlier. Banks failed. Major
corporations had to be salvaged by the government by means of large
injections of capital. The housing industry was practically paralyzed.
Unemployment and personal bankruptcies soared.
    These two elements combined—fear of terrorism and economic
recession—led to a renewed wave of nativism. By that time, the ethnic and
cultural composition of the nation had changed drastically. There were in
the United States millions of Muslim immigrants and their descendants, and
many in the larger society feared that such Muslim communities would be
hotbeds for terrorists. Economic crisis in Mexico, and the proxy wars that
the United States had fought in Central America in the 1980s, had led to a
wave of Latin American immigration. Others were immigrating from
Southeast Asia and Africa. In every major city, as well as in many smaller
towns, mosques, Hindu temples, and other non-Christian religious buildings
became a common sight. Clearly, the cultural and ethnic composition of the
nation was changing, and many saw this as a threat to the nation and its
values. Along the Mexican border, armed citizen groups took it upon
themselves the task of hunting those seeking to enter the country in search
of employment. In the media, some made a name for themselves by verbal
attacks on immigrants. The earlier “red scares” had been surpassed with the
demise of the Soviet Union, but now a new “brown scare” against all
immigrants of darker skin came to take their place.
    In the midst of all this, Christian churches sought to respond in both
word and action. Practically every major denomination developed programs
to reach the new immigrants. Some fostered a growing Christian-Muslim
dialogue. Others provided shelters for the homeless, food for the hungry,
legal advice for those who suffered injustice, support for immigrants risking
their lives attempting to cross the desert, etc. But at the same time that all of
this was a sign of vitality, it is significant to note that the voice of the
churches calling for greater justice, toleration, and understanding was
seldom heard. The media, and the public at large, did not show great
interest in hearing what the churches had to say on these matters. In the last
decades of the twentieth century, conservative Christians joined in a loose
coalition to promote conservative social and political agendas, and
conservative politicians sought their support. But by the end of the first
decade of the new century it was clear that the time when churches spoke
and society listened was passing—even though some religious leaders still
insisted on claiming a political and social clout that they no longer had.
    Statistics comparing the year 1900 with 2005 serve to summarize the
radical changes that were taking place in the religious landscape of the
United States. In 1900, 96 percent of the population declared themselves to
be Christians. By 2005, that number had declined to 83 percent. While
Roman Catholicism and Pentecostalism had grown—the former mostly by
immigration, and the latter by both immigration and by conversion—most
traditional “mainline” Protestant denominations had declined and continued
to do so. Even though Pentecostalism had grown in the United States, that
growth lagged far behind what was taking place in other parts of the world,
so that even within the Pentecostal tradition the United States did not play
the central role it had played fifty years earlier. The percentage of Jews
remained fairly stable, at about 2 percent. But this was not the case with
other religions. In 1900, there were some ten thousand Muslims in the
nation; and by 2005 there were almost five million. Other faiths with
negligible numbers in 1900 had also made great inroads, with Buddhists
approximating the three million mark, and Hindus surpassing a million.
Although not at fast as Europe, the United States too was rapidly moving
“beyond Christendom.”
                                    37

                Vitality at the Periphery


   Over the past century . . . the center of gravity of the Christian world
   has shifted inexorably southward, to Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
   . . . Christianity should enjoy a worldwide boom in the new century,
   but the vast majority of believers will be neither European nor Euro-
   American.


PHILIP JENKINS

While     the nineteenth century was the time when Christianity finally
became present in practically every corner of the world, the second half of
the twentieth and the early decades of the twenty-first century marked the
time when it ceased being mostly a Western religion. Those latter years
marked a worldwide reaction against the colonialism of the nineteenth
century, as well as against the neocolonialism that had taken its place in
several areas—particularly Latin America. This reaction could be felt not
only in the colonized regions, but also in the earlier colonial metropolises,
where the shortcomings of notions such as the white man’s burden and
Manifest Destiny were laid bare. But the end of the heyday of Western
colonialism did not mean that the churches founded in the midst of colonial
expansion would cease to exist. On the contrary, at a time when, as we have
seen, Christianity seemed to be in crisis in its traditional centers on the
North Atlantic—Europe, Canada, and the United States—it was showing
great vitality, growth, and creativity in the rest of the world. Thus,
Christianity was moving “beyond Christendom,” not only in the sense that
the North Atlantic was no longer predominantly Christian, but also in the
sense that new centers were emerging beyond the traditional centers of
Christendom. In this, the last decades of the twentieth century, and the early
decades of the twenty-first, would witness a geographical shift in
Christianity such as those that had taken place in the second to the fourth
centuries, when the early Jewish sect became an empire-wide religion, and
then in the seventh and eighth centuries, when the ancient centers of
Christianity in the Middle East and in North Africa were conquered by
Islam, and Western Christianity found its center on an axis that ran from
north to south—from the British Isles through the Carolingian lands, and
then on to Rome.
    By the second decade of the twenty-first century there were those in the
North Atlantic who claimed that Christianity was receding, that its numbers
were waning, that many churches were simply marking time and keeping
old traditions. But this was only partially true, first of all, because even in
the midst of its own crises Christianity in the North Atlantic showed
significant vitality; and, secondly, because in the former mission territories
of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, Christianity was more active and
vibrant than it had ever been before. This was seen in each of these areas,
not only in numeric growth—which in many cases was explosive—but also
in evangelistic zeal, in ecumenical initiatives, and in cultural and
theological creativity.

                                    ASIA
India, the land where William Carey’s work had inspired missionary efforts
throughout the world, is a prime example of the changes that were taking
place during the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. The years between the
two world wars were marked by a struggle for independence whose most
influential leader was Mohandas K. Ghandi (1869–1948), better known as
Mahatma Ghandi. In 1946, after long years of struggle, the British
government finally agreed to offer full independence to India. The ensuing
years were a time of great unrest during which the subcontinent was divided
—primarily on religious grounds—between Pakistan (later to be partitioned
again, into Pakistan and Bangladesh) and India, and Ghandi was
assassinated (1948). Finally, in 1950, the Republic of India was
inaugurated.
    India boasted some of the most ancient churches in the world, claiming
to have been founded by none other than the Apostle Thomas. Anglican and
other Protestant missions during the nineteenth century had sought to
revitalize the ancient Indian church—which in many cases meant to make
them more like Western Protestant churches. At the same time, Roman
Catholics tried to draw those ancient churches into obedience to the pope.
The eventual result was that the ancient Indian church was divided, with
some retaining their earlier allegiance, some becoming Anglicans or
Protestants of other denominations, others becoming Roman Catholic
Uniates, and still others founding a Protestant body known as the Church of
Mar Thoma, which early in the twenty-first century had approximately a
million members.
    One would expect such divisions, and the context of political unrest, to
have sapped the strength of the church, or at least turn it into a series of
isolated communities within Indian society. But this is not what happened.
On the contrary, Christianity in India showed unusual creativity and
evangelistic zeal. The mass conversions that had begun in the nineteenth
century, particularly among the lower castes, now continued, often as a
result of the charismatic movement, which reached India in the mid-
twentieth century. New charismatic communities appeared throughout the
nation, some simply repeating what they had learned from the West, but
others founding schools in which traditional Indian culture was reaffirmed
as a proper locus for the practice of the Christian faith. At the other extreme
of the social scale, the “churchless Christians” were mostly people from the
higher castes who sought to combine traditional Hindu contemplative
practices with Christianity without joining a church, and who were often
accused of syncretism.
    As for the Protestant churches that had been planted in that land earlier
within a colonial context, they too showed great creativity in seeking new
ways to express and live the faith within the context of Indian culture in an
independent nation. They excelled in the development of an indigenous
leadership capable of meeting these challenges. They played an important
role in the educational system of the entire nation. And in general they
gained the respect of the vast majority of the Indian population—even
though late in the twentieth century and early in the twenty-first a revival of
radical Hinduism led to occasional but significant clashes and even
violence. They also provided ministry to the large numbers of Indians living
abroad, particularly in Great Britain, in the United States, and in some of
the former British colonies in Africa.
    It was, however, in the field of ecumenism that the Indian churches
showed their greatest creativity. As a result of his missionary experience in
India, William Carey had called for a worldwide missionary conference to
meet in Cape Town, South Africa, in 1810—a conference which finally met
in Edinburgh a hundred years later, in 1910. Now India took the lead in
promoting Christian unity. Even before the conference in Edinburgh, in
1901, several churches of the Reformed tradition had achieved organic
union in India. By 1908, Reformed and Congregationalists joined to form
the United Church of South India, and in 1947 this church, with the addition
of Methodists and Anglicans, resulted in the Church of South India. At that
time, this was an almost unique example of the degree to which, when
mission becomes the central concern of the church, unity is one of the many
results. This example was soon followed by many others, not only in North
India, but also as far as Latin America, Africa, and the United States—
where as late as 2010 a unity such as that achieved in South India six
decades earlier still seemed an impossible dream. Furthermore, in part
thanks to its early ecumenical stance, the Indian Christian community
played an important role in the birth and leadership of the International
Missionary Council, and later of the World Council of Churches.
    Meanwhile, China was following a very different history. During the
first half of the twentieth century, and in spite of the Boxer Rebellion at the
beginning of the century, many Protestant missionary programs and
endeavors focused their attention on China, to the extent that there were
over six thousand missionaries in that land, and their success was such that
some began to speak of a massive conversion that would dwarf the
conversion of Constantine and of the Roman Empire. As part of that
process, thousands of Chinese pastors and other church leaders were
trained. At the same time, the Roman Catholic Church was also establishing
deeper roots in China—a process marked by the consecration of the first six
Chinese bishops in 1926. Catholics as well as Protestants spoke of the great
success of their missions in China, and of the hope for even greater
successes. Then came World War II and its aftermath, the establishment of
the People’s Republic of China and its communist regime, the Cold War,
and finally the Cultural Revolution under the leadership of Mao Tse Dung.
At the beginning of those turbulent years, practically all foreign
missionaries left the country—some voluntarily and some by order of the
government. And from that point conditions worsened. In 1950, the
government forced the churches to adopt a “Christian manifesto” which
many believed violated their conscience. Resistance led to persecution,
mostly through a “denunciation campaign” in which people were
encouraged to denounce those whose views did not entirely coincide with
those of the government. Claiming that there were too many churches, the
government began forcing the “consolidation” of churches—which
effectively closed many churches and allowed church property to be
confiscated. Then, in the 1960s the Cultural Revolution resulted in even
further persecution and the closing of all churches. The point came where
many, both inside China and outside, feared that the earlier history of
Christianity in China, where the church had been repeatedly planted and
then disappeared, would recur once again.
   But, even while many Chinese Christians capitulated before pressure
and persecution, many did not. In some major cities where churches were
closed and worship gatherings were prohibited, believers would make it a
point to walk in front of the church at the times formerly appointed for
worship, nod at one another, and keep on walking. In private homes, and
under great secrecy, small groups continued meeting.
   Then, in the 1970s, when the failure of the Cultural Revolution, rising
tension with the Soviet Union, and economic necessities led the government
to allow more freedom to Christians, the world was surprised to find that
Christianity had continued to grow in China. In a land were there were
approximately five million Christians in 1900, there were now some fifty
million. Even under the shadows of the Cultural Revolution the church had
continued existing and growing. Many of the churches that had been closed
for years now opened their doors and soon filled with worshipers.
Communities that had met clandestinely either joined the recently reopened
churches or simply became churches themselves—the “house churches.”
Seminaries were opened, and soon had hundreds of students. Christian and
theological books—at first only a few, but then in increasing numbers—
were published and translated into Chinese. By the end of the twentieth
century, a limited number of foreign church workers were present in China,
and Chinese Christian leaders were traveling to ecumenical gatherings
abroad, telling their story, and contributing to the revitalization of churches
in the older centers of Christianity.
    The ecumenical movement in China followed a very different course
than it did in India. Here it was the government that forced the churches to
unite, mostly so that they could be controlled. As soon as such pressures
were eased, a number of churches reasserted their differences from the rest,
and reconstituted themselves as separate entities. But many did not.
    Among Protestants, many began speaking of a “post-denominational”
age into which China had been forced, but that pointed to the future shape
of the church in other parts of the world.
    However, divisions and tensions still remained. Among Roman
Catholics, the most difficult question was whether to accept the authority of
bishops who followed the policies of the government, and who often had
been selected by the government. Thus, there was an “official” Catholic
Church and also an “underground” Catholic Church, both claiming to be
Catholic, and forcing authorities in Rome to walk fine diplomatic lines. In
2006, the Vatican excommunicated two bishops who had been consecrated
by the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association—a pro-government Catholic
group—without papal approval. Similarly, among Protestants the church
officially recognized by the government—known as the Chinese Christian
Council—was accused by some of being too subservient to political
authorities. Quite independently from it, many “house churches” continued
meeting and affirming their faith, often with more charismatic overtones
than the larger church. Such tensions, however, should not be exaggerated,
for quite often the official church would intervene with the government on
behalf of a house church, and there were people who belonged to both.
    The story of Christianity in Japan during the twentieth century and early
in the twenty-first is in some ways similar to that of China, and in other
ways quite different. Here too, after American Commodore Perry and others
after him forced Japan to open its markets to foreign products, and its lands
to foreign missionaries, there were those who expected the entire nation to
become Christian. Here too the Second Word War and its aftermath put an
end to such dreams. Here too the government—although ideologically very
different from the Chinese government—forced the churches to unite,
forming the United Church of Christ in Japan (1941). And here too
important segments withdrew from such forced unity as soon as new
political conditions allowed it—although, as in the case of China, most
Protestants remained in the united church or Kyodan. However, the growth
of this church was not as spectacular as that of its counterpart in China. In
Japan, most of the numeric growth of Christianity took place through the
work of Pentecostal and Charismatic groups, whose presence in that nation
can be documented as early as 1913.




 The church in China was noted for its services to the people. This outdoors counseling center was
                                   one of many such services.

    Finally, since it would be impossible to survey here the story of
Christianity in every nation in Asia, we must turn our attention to Korea,
where Protestant Christianity would experience its most notable numeric
growth. Late in the nineteenth century, missionaries in Korea had begun
following the “Nevius missionary methods,” named after their proponent
John L. Nevius, who argued that missionary work should concentrate on the
working and lower classes as well as women and girls, on the development
of native leadership, and on the growth of the church toward self-support in
terms of both finances and personnel. To this was added a great revival that
swept many Korean churches—particularly Methodist and Presbyterian—in
the early decades of the twentieth century. Therefore, although the Japanese
invasion in 1910 brought great hardship to Christians—mostly Protestants
—who refused to participate in the Shinto worship promoted by the
Japanese, the Korean church continued its life and growth throughout
World War II. By the time the Japanese were finally forced to withdraw
from the peninsula, Korean Christians had shown that they were able to
affirm both their faith and much of their culture. The partition of the
peninsula into North and South Korea brought new hardships for Christians,
who at the time were most numerous in the North, and now had to live
under one of the most repressive communist regimes in the world. Even so,
the growth of the churches continued unabated in both North and South
Korea. To this were soon added Pentecostal missionaries, mostly from the
United States, who settled in South Korea, founding new churches and
reinforcing the experiences of the Korean revival several decades earlier.
The result of all this was a vibrant church that was present in both the rural
areas and the cities, where the membership of congregations often ran into
the tens of thousands. Furthermore, the Korean church soon began sending
missionaries overseas, including Japan and China—two nations that had
repeatedly occupied and oppressed Korea itself—but also Africa, Latin
America, and the United States. In this latter country, where there was
significant Korean immigration, there was also rapid church growth among
the Korean population—both because many of the immigrants were
Christians, and because they evangelized their non-Christian Korean
neighbors and friends.
    Furthermore, in the decade of the 1960s the Korean church began
producing its own brand of liberation theology, Minjung theology, which
sought to affirm the struggles of those—Christians as well as not—who
seek liberation from economic and social oppression.
    Throughout Asia, the late twentieth century and the early decades of the
twenty-first saw the growth of churches that were self-governing, self-
propagating—even beyond the limits of their own nations—and largely
self-supporting. Just as Korean Protestantism had grown sufficiently strong
to send missionaries throughout the world, so were the Philippines sending
Catholic priests and nuns to traditionally Catholic countries who now
suffered a lack of priests and nuns. In all of this, the churches in Asia were
fulfilling the dreams of earlier missionaries who hoped to plant such self-
sufficient churches. But they were also going beyond such dreams by
becoming, not only self-governing, self-supporting, and self-propagating,
but also self-interpreting, proposing their own understanding of their
mission as well as their own theological perspectives and readings of
Scripture within their cultural, social, religious, and political contexts.
Several of these churches were also showing the rest of Christianity the way
into the future by uniting and collaborating in ways that were not common
in the older centers of Christendom.

                                  AFRICA
Africa too could boast of one of the most ancient churches in the world, the
Ethiopian Orthodox Church, founded in the fourth century (see vol. I,
Chapter 25), the largest of the churches that had refused to accept the
decisions of the Council of Chalcedon, and thus dubbed Monophysite. This
church was closely tied to Ethiopian tradition and national identity, and
played an important role in the resistance to Italian imperialism during
World War II. Later in the twentieth century it suffered significant
difficulties, on the one hand, by the inroads of Islam from neighboring
countries and, on the other, by the advent to power of a hostile regime in the
1970s. Yet it held its own, so that early in the twenty-first century it has
approximately 35 million members. Although not intentionally, this church
—as many others—spread to other areas during the second half of the
twentieth century, as Ethiopians migrated to other lands—particularly
Europe and the United States.
    Roman Catholicism had long been present in Africa, first in the
Portuguese colonies of Angola and Mozambique, and then in the vast
French colonies in central and North Africa. The decisions of the Second
Vatican Council, particularly regarding the liturgy in the vernacular
languages and its adaptation to various cultures, produced some friction, for
there was wide disagreement as to how far this should be taken. For
instance, when Catholics in Zaire proposed their own liturgy, this was held
back by the Vatican, which apparently considered it too radical a departure
from its own standards, and finally approved it with significant
modifications. Similar struggles took place in other areas, particularly as the
colonial powers withdrew and nations began reaffirming their identity,
culture, and traditions. Even so, by the end of the twentieth century Roman
Catholicism was growing in practically every nation in sub-Saharan Africa,
and African Catholics were making significant contributions to the church
at large. This growth was particularly notable in that the Catholic Church in
Africa produced large numbers of priestly vocations at a time when in
traditional Catholic countries there was a crisis for lack of priests. Thus, by
the early twenty-first century there were numerous African priests serving
parishes in Ireland as well as in Portugal and France. This is one more
example of how what had earlier been the periphery of the church was now
becoming a new center of vitality and missionary activity.
    It was, however, among Protestants that explosive growth took place.
When the former British colonies became independent, most of the leaders
of the new nations—not only in politics, but also in education, trade, and
the professions—had been educated in Protestant schools, mostly sponsored
by the Church of England. At the same time, Protestant missionaries had
long been working among the rural population and the poorer urban
dwellers. Independence provided an opportunity for the growth of forms of
Christianity that were connected with the ancient traditions of the people,
and that often provided leadership in times of struggle. In places such as
Uganda, Kenya and Tanganyika there were veritable mass conversions, so
that in Kenya, for instance, where less than ten percent of the population
was Christian before World War II, by the beginning of the twenty-first
century that figure had risen to sixty percent. In other places in northern
sub-Saharan Africa, such as Nigeria, southern Sudan, etc., there was also
notable growth, but there was also a constant conflict with Islam—a
conflict that often revolved around the conviction of many Muslims that
Islamic law should be the law of the land, and the opposition of Christians
and others to such measures.
    In southern Africa, where the presence of Islam was not as strong, the
great struggle was first against colonial rule, and then against systems of
white supremacy. This was most notable in South Africa, where the struggle
against apartheid was long and painful. In that struggle, black African
Christians such as Anglican Desmond Tutu, Reformed Allan Boesak, and
Methodist Nelson Mandela expressed the feelings of the black majority,
connected them with their Christian faith, and sought resolutions that were
both just and peaceful. Although less famous, there were similar leaders in
Zimbabwe—which after its liberation found itself in the grips of a corrupt
and oppressive regime—and Namibia.
    Pentecostalism had arrived in Africa shortly after the Azusa Street
revival, but it was in the latter half of the twentieth century that its growth
was most impressive. Given its close connection with the United States,
Liberia was the first country to feel the impact of the Pentecostal
movement. But this movement soon spread throughout the continent,
impacting the churches already there, planting new branches of the sending
churches, and resulting in the birth of a number of independent
autochthonous churches. A notable example of the latter was The Church of
Jesus Christ on Earth through the Prophet Kimbangu. Samuel Kimbangu
(1887–1951) was born in the Congo—now Zaire—when that land was
under Belgian rule. Originally a Baptist, in 1921 he began preaching and
practicing a charismatic form of Christianity, with emphasis on healing the
sick and even raising the dead. His public ministry lasted only a few
months, for the Belgian government had him arrested, accused of sedition,
and condemned to death—a sentence that was then commuted to life
imprisonment. But even while he was in prison his fame and the number of
his followers grew—the latter coming to the conclusion that their prophet
was a special envoy of Jesus. In 1959, eight years after his death, the
Belgian government gave official permission for Kimbangu’s followers to
conduct public worship. Soon, under the leadership of the prophet’s son,
Joseph Diangienda, the church expanded to several other countries in sub-
Saharan Africa. By the twenty-first century, partly through missionary work
and partly through the migration of some of its members, its was to be
found also in a number of countries beyond Africa—including the United
Kingdom, the Caribbean, and the United States. At first quite independent
of all other Christian groups, by the beginning of the twenty-first century
the Kimbanguist church had begun to join councils of churches in various
African nations.
    While the Kimbanguist movement is probably the most numerous, there
are many other autochthonous churches in Africa—more than ten thousand
in southern Africa alone. By 2010, their total membership was estimated at
between eighty and ninety million. Many of these churches followed a path
similar to the Kimbanguist movement, eventually sending missionaries not
only to other regions of Africa, but also to other areas of the world—
particularly to Great Britain, the English-speaking Caribbean, and Haiti.
    Since the presence of these churches, as well as the issue of the
relationship between Christianity and the cultures of Africa, provoked much
theological debate, by the twenty-first century Africa, which until recently
had been the recipient of missions and had been learning its theology from
overseas churches, had become a center sending missionaries to various
parts of the world, and beginning to develop its own theologies. It has also
become a center for its unique form of ecumenism with the creation in 1978
of the Organization of African Instituted Churches, which promoted
cooperation in theological education by extension, the promotion of
women’s rights, and further attempts to incarnate Christianity in African
cultures and traditions.

                            LATIN AMERICA
In Latin America, the early years of the twentieth century saw the
continuation of the conflict between conservatives and liberals, and of the
impact this conflict had on the life of the Catholic Church. The most
notable among such conflicts was the Mexican Revolution of 1910—
already discussed in Chapter 33—but similar struggles took place
throughout the region. Eventually, during the course of the century, even the
most conservative nations in the continent settled on constitutions granting
freedom of thought and of religion, and most of the traditional privileges of
the Church and its clergy were abolished. This process was complex, and
need not be spelled out here. Two examples—one for Argentina and the
other from Brazil—should suffice to show some of the issues at stake.
    In Argentina, Juan Domingo Perón came to power in 1943 by means of
a military coup. At that stage, he had the support of the Catholic hierarchy,
who saw in his movement and in the military who supported him the best
defense against Communism and secularism. As part of his program, Perón
decreed obligatory religious instruction in schools. The Church, on its part,
allied itself with the growing labor movement, which was Perón’s base of
popular support, and did not object to the slogan, “true Catholicism is
Peronism.” But then difficulties arose. Perón wanted to control the life of
the church, giving it mostly a ceremonial role, and counting on it to give his
government religious sanction. He even insisted on the canonization of his
wife Eva—Evita. By 1954, the rebellion that finally overthrew him in 1955
had the support of many among the hierarchy, and the slogan of the rebels
was “in the name of the Virgin, freedom, and the Catholic faith.”
Eventually, as the dust settled, Argentina became a secular state in which
the Church was reduced to an inspirational and ceremonial role.
    In Brazil, during the dictatorship of Getulio Vargas in the 1930s, several
laws were passed in support of the Catholic Church—divorce was
outlawed, the Church was given authority to ban “indecent” movies, and
church marriages were granted official recognition. All this was done
mostly through the action of Ação Integralista Brasileira, a movement that
did not have the official sanction of the hierarchy, but which the archbishop
of Rio, Cardinal Sebastião Leme, secretly supported. However, eventually
this movement went beyond the bounds of what the hierarchy deemed
appropriate—offering its own rites for baptisms, marriages, and funerals,
and even claiming that it was the road to eternal salvation—and began
losing the support of the hierarchy. In 1937, using a supposed Communist
conspiracy as an excuse, Vargas abolished the constitution and began
governing by decree and seeking to limit the Church to a strictly spiritual
role. In 1950, when, after being overthrown by a coup in 1945, Vargas
returned to power through the electoral process. He refused to reestablish
the privileges of the Church and its clergy. In this, he was expressing the
sentiments of a growing number of Brazilians, who felt that the traditional
privileges of the Church were unfounded and resulted in economic
exploitation and lack of freedom. These new tendencies were seen in the
growing prestige of the bishop of Recife, Hélder Câmara (1909–1999), a
former member of the Integralista movement who now became a champion
of the poor and the oppressed, and of revolution through peaceful means,
and who was nominated four times for the Nobel Peace Prize. In 1967, he
led an international group of bishops in formulating a Declaration of
Bishops of the Third World, advocating for a more just social and economic
order.
    The watershed in the history of Latin American Catholicism in the
twentieth century was the gathering of the Consejo Episcopal
Latinoamericano (C.E.L.A.M.) in Medellín, Colombia, in 1968. By that
time, Latin American liberation theology—to be discussed later in this
chapter—had begun making inroads among the Catholic leadership, and
therefore this conference was marked by a turning of the attention of the
Church from its own inner issues and problems, to the needs of the people
—particularly the oppressed and the poor. In his fairly mild opening
statement, Pope Paul VI had encouraged the bishops to consider the plight
of the poor, and to reaffirm the poverty of the Church. The conference took
this encouragement to heart, as well as the declaration of Vatican II (in
Gaudium et spes) that “the joys and hopes, the pains and anxieties, of
people today, especially those who are poor or in any way afflicted, are the
joys and hopes, the pains and anxieties of the followers of Christ.” The very
first document of the Medellín conference tackled the matter of the world
economic order, declaring that both Communism and capitalism “militate
against the dignity of the human person,” and that “Latin America sees
itself caught between these two options and remains dependent on one or
the other of the centers of power which control its economy.”
    The changes in the life of the church that Medellín brought about were
momentous. A church that had traditionally been preoccupied above all
with its own privileges and power, and had often been employed by the
powerful to sanction their privileges, now declared itself the champion of
the poor and the oppressed. There were still many among the leadership of
the church whose goals and perspectives remained largely unchanged. Soon
C.E.L.A.M. itself sought to soften what had been declared at Medellín. But
there were others who took these declarations as a call to explore new
theologies and new ways of being the church. In these conflicts, the
tensions that had existed in Latin American Catholicism from the very
beginning—tensions between those whose main concern was the life of the
Church, and those whose main concern was the life of the people—surfaced
once again. To these we shall return later in this chapter.
    As a result of both immigration and missionary work, Protestantism was
well established in Latin America by the end of the nineteenth century.
During the twentieth, most of the more traditional Protestant churches
continued to grow—some of them quite rapidly. But it was the Pentecostal
movement that resulted in explosive growth. The nation first noted for
Pentecostal growth was Chile, where Methodist missionary Willis Hoover,
who apparently had been influenced by the Azusa Street revival of 1906,
led a movement in 1909. There was great rejoicing, speaking in tongues,
faith healing, and other such phenomena, and the movement rapidly spread
from Valparaíso—where Hoover served as pastor—to Santiago and other
areas of the country. Eventually, Hoover—along with a tenth of his church’s
membership—left the Methodist Church to become pastor of a newly
formed Methodist Pentecostal Church in Valparaíso. The new
denomination, known as Iglesia Metodista Pentecostal, was the first such
denomination in the Third World. From that moment, the movement grew
by leaps and bounds. It soon became associated with nationalistic feelings
and a desire to be freed from foreign missionary control, to the point that
the names of several of its early churches include the word nacional. It also
provided more room for leadership on the part of the common people and of
women. As is often the case, the Iglesia Metodista Pentecostal divided
repeatedly. As the movement became known in other traditional
denominations—Presbyterians and Baptists among them—some left them
to found their own Pentecostal churches. By 2005 there were more than five
million Pentecostals in Chile, while the Methodist Church of Chile, from
which the movement had emerged, had less than eighteen thousand
members.
    Similar events elsewhere in Latin America led to other Pentecostal
churches, and to their unprecedented growth. In Brazil, the movement
began among Presbyterians, but soon spread to other denominations. One of
the larger groups, although not founded by missionaries from the
Assemblies of God, eventually joined that denomination. In Mexico, people
who had experienced the Azusa Street revival took the movement to the
state of Chihuahua. Fleeing the chaos and dangers of the Mexican
Revolution, a woman by the name of Romana Carbajal de Valenzuela and
her husband moved to California, where they joined a church that had
resulted from the Azusa Street revival, and which insisted that baptism
should be only “in the name of Jesus,” and not of the Trinity. In 1914, she
returned to Mexico, and her testimony there resulted in the Iglesia
Apostólica de la Fe en Cristo Jesús, which by the beginning of the twenty-
first century had more than a million members, and missionaries and
congregations throughout the Americas.
    All of this resulted in such growth that some wondered whether Latin
America would eventually become mostly Pentecostal. If one counts
members and “adherents”—people connected to churches, but not officially
part of them—by the second decade of the twenty-first century Pentecostals
accounted for 47 percent of the population in Brazil, 36 percent in Chile,
and 13 percent in Mexico. This challenged the traditional view of
Christendom in a way that was different from what was taking place in Asia
and Africa, for what was happening here was that a region that had long
been counted as part of Christendom was now to a large degree changing its
allegiance from one branch of Christianity to another—to the point that
traditionally Roman Catholic Latin America was rapidly becoming one of
the most Protestant regions of the world.
    Such growth could not take place without repeated divisions as well as
the birth of movements that departed from much of the traditional Christian
faith. Most of these preached a “gospel of prosperity,” promising economic
and other success to their followers, while others turned their founders and
leaders into objects of worship. Among the first, the most notable was the
Igreja Universal do Reinho de Deus—Universal Church of the Reign of
God—which was said to be the largest international economic enterprise in
Brazil. In Mexico, the Iglesia la Luz del Mundo—The Light of the World
Church—followed a similar path, although its success was not as great as
that of its Brazilian counterpart. There were also “apostolic networks”
whose members certified one another’s “apostolicity,” and often claimed
that pastors who joined their networks would enjoy unprecedented success.
One of these “apostles,” for instance, invited others to join his network by
announcing on the Internet that before becoming an apostle he would
preach a fortnight for a bunch of bananas; but no more now that he had
become an apostle and drove a luxury car! Another began his ministry as a
“bishop,” then became an “apostle,” and finally claimed the title of
“archangel.” Among those who deified their leaders, there was one in
Mexico whose leader entered the town in a large white convertible, while
his followers shouted, “Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!”
In Puerto Rico—and later in Miami—a former heroin addict founded a
movement based on the notion that he was the Lord incarnate.
    While such radically heterodox movements draw much attention, it
should be noted that the vast majority of Pentecostals remained firm in the
traditional tenets of the Christian faith, that most did not preach a gospel of
prosperity, and that in spite of many existing stereotypes many Pentecostal
individuals and churches were deeply involved in social services and
advocacy for the needy and the oppressed.
   The ecumenical movement did not advance rapidly in Latin America for
a number of reasons. First of all, most Protestant preaching and teaching
had long been anti-Catholic and anti-Communist. As a result, there was
among many the fear that the ecumenical movement was a papal ploy to
reassert the pope’s authority and force others into the Catholic fold, and
there was among others the feeling that the social and political stances of
the World Council of Churches were pro-Communist. Then,
fundamentalism and power struggles caused many churches to divide
repeatedly, resulting in relatively small groups that wished no connection
with others. This was exacerbated by insistence on every minor point of
doctrine, as if salvation depended on agreeing on each one of them. But
even so, in Latin America too the quest for unity could be seen. In 1961,
two large Chilean Pentecostal churches joined the World Council of
Churches—the first Pentecostal churches ever to do so. In 1982, the
Consejo Latinoamericano de Iglesias—CLAI, or Latin American Council
of Churches—was founded with wide Pentecostal as well as Evangelical
participation, and also with close ties to the World Council of Churches. In
the same year, a more conservative counterpart, the Confraternidad
Evangélica Latinoamericana—CONELA, Latin American Evangelical
Confraternity—was founded, in clear competition with CLAI.

                   THE ECUMENICAL MOVEMENT
The nineteenth century had brought about the existence of a truly
worldwide church. By the latter half of that century, there were movements
seeking further collaboration among the various churches in each region. In
1910, the World Missionary Conference in Edinburgh gave further impulse
to a movement that, although interrupted by two world wars, would
eventually lead to the founding of the World Council of Churches and to
other visible manifestations of Christian unity. Soon, however, it was
discovered that such unity did not mean that Christians from other parts of
the world would become one in an essentially Western church; rather, it
meant that all Christians, whatever their race or nationality, would engage
in a common search for the meaning of obedience to Christ in the modern
world. Thus, the ecumenical movement had two facets. The first and most
obvious was the quest for greater and more visible unity. The second, with
perhaps even more drastic consequences, was the birth of a worldwide
church to whose mission and self-understanding all would contribute.
    The World Missionary Conference of 1910 appointed a Continuation
Committee, which in turn led to the founding of the International
Missionary Council in 1921. By that time, other regional and national
organizations for missionary cooperation had appeared in Europe, the
United States, Canada, and Australia, partly as a result of the work done at
Edinburgh. These organizations provided the nucleus for the new body; but
it was also decided that the “younger churches” that had resulted from
missionary work would be directly represented. Again, the International
Missionary Council did not intend to set guidelines or rules for missionary
work, but rather to serve as a meeting place where strategies, experiences,
and various resources could be shared. At the First Assembly of the
International Missionary Council (which was appropriately held in
Jerusalem in 1928), almost a fourth of the delegates belonged to the
younger churches—a great advance from the seventeen who had been
present at Edinburgh. Both in Jerusalem and in the Second Assembly, held
in Madras, India, in 1938, the question of the nature of the church and the
content of the Christian message came to the foreground, thus indicating
that it was impossible to exclude theological discussion from a truly open
encounter on the world mission of the church. Then the work of the Council
was interrupted by World War II, and the Third Assembly, held in Whitby,
Canada, in 1947, devoted most of its attention to reestablishing the links
broken by the war, and to planning for the reconstruction of missionary
work ravaged by the conflict. By then, however, there was a growing
consciousness of the indissoluble union between church and mission, so
that it seemed unwise to discuss missionary issues without also entering a
dialogue on the nature of the church and other theological matters. This
theme was increasingly heard in the next two assemblies of the
International Missionary Council, held in Willingen, Germany, in 1952, and
in Ghana, from 1957 to 1958. By then, it was decided that the International
Missionary Council should join the World Council of Churches, which it
did at the New Delhi assembly of the World Council, in 1961. At the time
of this merger, steps were taken so that bodies that would not or could not
join the World Council of Churches itself could still be fully represented in
the division that fell heir to the work of the International Missionary
Council.
    Another major movement leading to the founding of the World Council
of Churches was “Faith and Order.” To allay suspicions, the convocation of
the World Missionary Conference of 1910 had explicitly excluded matters
of faith and order—meaning any discussion of the beliefs of churches, or of
their understanding and practice of ordination, sacraments, and so forth.
Although this was a necessary exclusion in order to make the conference as
inclusive as possible, many were convinced that the time had come to open
a forum for the discussion of those very issues. Foremost among these was
a bishop of the Episcopal Church, Charles H. Brent. At his prodding, the
Anglican communion took the first steps in calling for a meeting on faith
and order. Others soon joined, and after the interruption of World War I, and
prolonged negotiations thereafter, the First World Conference on Faith and
Order gathered in 1927 in Lausanne, Switzerland. Its four hundred
delegates represented 108 churches—Protestant, Orthodox, and Old
Catholic (those who had left Roman Catholicism at the time of the
promulgation of papal infallibility). Many of them had gained experience in
international and ecumenical gatherings through their participation in the
Student Christian Movement—which for decades provided most of the
leadership for several branches of the ecumenical movement. At the
conference, it was decided not to seek unanimity by either very broad and
therefore meaningless statements, or by doctrinal definitions that would
necessarily exclude some. On the contrary, the method followed was frank
and open discussion of issues, with the drafting of a document that began
by stressing those points on which agreement had been reached, and then
clearly stating those other points on which differences still remained. Thus,
the documents were characterized by phrases such as “we agree,” or “we
believe,” followed by points of clarification introduced by phrases such as
“there are among us divergent views,” or “it is held by many churches
represented in the Conference.” By the end of the meeting, it was clear to
all present that their agreements were much more significant than their
disagreements, and that a number of the latter could probably be overcome
by further dialogue and clarification. Before adjourning the conference, a
Continuation Committee was appointed, under the leadership of William
Temple, archbishop of York (and later of Canterbury). After Temple’s
death, Brent succeeded him, and the Second World Conference on Faith and
Order finally gathered at Edinburgh in 1937. It followed the same method
of Lausanne, again with valuable results. But its most significant decision
was to agree with the call of the Second Conference on Life and Work,
gathered at Oxford the previous month, for the founding of a “World
Council of Churches.”
    The Life and Work movement was also the result of the missionary
experiences of earlier generations, as well as of the conviction that the
various churches must join in every practical endeavor in which such
collaboration was possible. Its foremost leader was Nathan Söderblom,
Lutheran archbishop of Uppsala in Sweden. World War I, while interrupting
the plans for an international gathering, did give Söderblom and others the
opportunity to work together in finding solutions to the enormous problems
caused by the conflict. Finally, the first conference on “Practical
Christianity”—the early name of the movement—gathered in Stockholm in
1925. Its agenda consisted in seeking common responses to contemporary
problems on the basis of the gospel. Its delegates were divided into five
sections, each discussing one of five main themes and its ramifications:
economic and industrial matters, moral and social issues, international
affairs, Christian education, and means by which churches could join in
further collaboration. From the beginning, this movement took a firm stance
against every form of exploitation or imperialism. Thus, at a time when
mechanization was causing unemployment, weakening unions, and
lowering wages, the Conference echoed “the aspirations of the working
people toward an equitable and fraternal order, the only one compatible
with the divine plan of redemption.” Also, with a prophetic voice whose
truthfulness would be confirmed decades later, it noted a “general
resentment against white imperialism” that threatened to break into open
conflict. This conference also appointed a Continuation Committee that
organized the Second Conference on Life and Work. This gathered at
Oxford in 1937, and its final documents included a strong word against
every form of totalitarianism, and a condemnation of war as a method to
solve international conflict. Also, as has been noted, it called for the
combining of Life and Work with Faith and Order in a single World Council
of Churches.
    With that decision, and the concurrence of Faith and Order, the stage
was set for the founding of such a council. The two movements appointed a
joint committee, and work began toward the convocation of the council’s
first assembly. World War II, however, interrupted such plans. During the
conflict, contacts made through the nascent ecumenical movement were
instrumental in establishing networks of Christians on both sides of the
battlefront, giving support to the Confessing Church in Germany, and
saving Jews in various lands under Nazi rule. Finally, on August 22, 1948,
the First Assembly of the World Council of Churches was called to order in
Amsterdam. One hundred and seven churches from forty-four nations were
part of it. The opening sermon was delivered by D. T. Niles, a Methodist
from Ceylon who had ample experience as a leader of the Student Christian.
Other speakers were Karl Barth, Joseph Hromádka, Martin Niemöller,
Reinhold Niebuhr, and John Foster Dulles. The Council was organized so as
to include the concerns previously related to Life and Work as well as those
of Faith and Order—under its Division of Studies, there was a Commission
on Faith and Order that continued meeting and organizing world
conferences, while the more practical concerns of Life and Work were
generally included under the Division of Ecumenical Action.
    While rejoicing in the unity that the very existence of the Council
manifested, the delegates also looked at the world around them, and sought
to deal with the issues confronting that world. Significantly, at a time when
the Cold War was beginning, the Council called on all churches to reject
both Communism and liberal capitalism, and to oppose the mistaken notion
that these two systems exhaust all possible alternatives. As could be
expected, this declaration, and similar later ones, were not always well
received.
    After 1948, the membership of the World Council of Churches
continued growing. Most significant was the increased participation of the
Orthodox, who had jointly decided not to attend the Amsterdam assembly.
When it was clarified that the World Council was not and did not claim to
be an “ecumenical council” after the fashion of Nicea, and that it had no
intention of becoming a church, the Orthodox did join the Council. Since
several Orthodox churches existed under Communist regimes, and their
delegates could only attend World Council meetings with government
approval, this increased the suspicion on the part of many that the World
Council was becoming the instrument of an international Communist
conspiracy. In any case, by the time of the Second Assembly, gathered in
Evanston, Illinois, in 1954, 163 churches were present. The Council began
to turn its attention to the church in its local concreteness, trying to avoid
the dangers of forgetting that those who gathered in its assemblies were,
after all, the representatives of millions living and worshiping in every
corner of the globe. When the Third Assembly gathered in New Delhi, in
1961, the member churches numbered 197. The merging at New Delhi of
the International Missionary Council with the World Council of Churches
also gave the latter more direct contacts with the Third World and the
younger churches. Such contacts were increased by the membership in the
Council of two Pentecostal churches from Chile—the first such bodies to
join. This assembly also continued the earlier emphasis on the church at the
parish level by speaking of the unity of “all in each place.” Later assemblies
in Uppsala (1968), Nairobi (1975), and Vancouver (1983) continued these
trends. Nairobi resulted in the much-discussed document on Baptism,
Eucharist, and Ministry, that many saw as a breakthrough on these matters.
At Vancouver, the delegates insisted on relating issues of peace and justice,
speaking of the “dark shadow” of the most perilous arms race and the most
destructive “systems of injustice” the world had ever known. By then, in
response to the new openness of the Catholic Church connected with the
work of John XXIII and the Second Vatican Council, the World Council
had also established fruitful conversations with the Catholic Church, often
leading to collaboration in various projects and studies.
    At its seventh assembly, held in Canberra, Australia, in 1991, the World
Council of Churches turned its attention to ecological matters and the care
of creation and to the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, brought to the foreground
by the far-reaching charismatic movement. The first of these concerns
resulted on a programmatic emphasis on “Justice, Peace, and the Integrity
of Creation.” The second led to deep divisions, for some—led by the
Orthodox—insisted on the role of the church and its tradition as channels of
the Spirit, while others claimed that the Spirit was leading the church to
unprecedented use and acceptance of the traditional religious views and
practices of various ancient cultures.
    By its eighth and ninth assemblies, held in Harare in 1998 and in Porto
Alegre in 2006, it was clear that the World Council of Churches—and with
it many similar organizations in countries such as the United States—was in
crisis. While dwindling financial support was part of the crisis, this was
only the tip of the iceberg, for many were questioning what they called “the
Genevan model” of ecumenism, and sought other means to affirm and
develop the unity of the church.
    While these events were taking place at the global level, at the regional
and national levels there was a similar movement toward Christian unity.
This was manifested in regional, national, and local councils of churches,
and in the organic unions that many churches sought. Most of these unions,
particularly in Europe and the United States, comprised churches of very
similar backgrounds and theology; but other areas took the leadership in
more daring church unions. In 1925, the United Church of Canada was
formed. Through a long series of unions—nineteen in all—that church
comprised what had originally been forty different denominations. In 1922,
the National Christian Council in China called on the missionaries and
sending churches to “remove all obstacles” in the way of organic union. In
1927, the first synod of the Church of Christ in China was called to order. It
included Christians of the Reformed tradition, Methodists, Baptists,
Congregationalists, and others. During World War II, under pressure from
the government, the Church of Christ in Japan—or Kyodan—was founded,
with the participation of forty-two denominations. After the war, some of
these groups withdrew; but most remained, convinced that obedience to the
gospel demanded of them a common witness. In 1947, the Church of South
India was founded. This merger was particularly significant, for this was the
first time that such a union included Christians who insisted on bishops
with apostolic succession—the Anglicans—and others who did not even
have bishops. Since that time, there have been hundreds of union
conversations throughout the world, and the mergers that have taken place
are too numerous to mention. In the United States, the Consultation of
Church Union (COCU) proposed to its participating denominations a plan
for a “Church of Christ Uniting.” Significantly, such unions have proceeded
more rapidly in what used to be called “mission territories” than in the older
centers of Christendom, thus showing once again that there is a connection
between mission and unity.
    While all this was taking place, other forms of Christian unity were
being explored throughout the world. In some areas, more conservative
churches that disagreed with the views and practices of the World Council
of Churches and of regional or national councils created their own councils
and associations of churches. Most of these followed the conciliar—or
“Genevan”—model, although limiting it to those holding more conservative
views. By the end of the twentieth century many of them were facing a
crisis similar to that of the World Council of Churches and its affiliate
ecumenical bodies.
    There were many other efforts at expressing Christian unity during the
twentieth century. In many cases, a measure of unity was brought about by
common concerns cutting across denominational lines—concerns such as
ecological responsibility, human sexuality, minority rights, etc. The most
successful were those connected with a particular aspect of the traditional
mission of the church—feeding the hungry, providing medical services for
the poor, evangelism, etc. A good example of this form of ecumenism is the
Lausanne Covenant. This resulted from the International Conference on
World Evangelisation, which gathered in Lausanne in 1974 under the
auspices of evangelicals such as the Billy Graham, of the United States, and
John Stott, of the United Kingdom, and led to the founding of a Lausanne
Committee for World Evangelization, and to affiliate regional bodies in
various parts of the world. Significantly, the Lausanne Committee planned
to celebrate the Third Congress on World Evangelisation in Cape Town in
2010—at the same place and in the same city where William Carey had
hoped to gather a world missionary conference exactly two hundred years
earlier—thus signaling once again the connection between unity and
mission.

  THIRD WORLD AND OTHER “CONTEXTUAL” THEOLOGIES
While all this was happening, other momentous developments were taking
place in the field of theology. Until well into the twentieth century,
Christian theology had been dominated by people of white European stock,
mostly male, at least middle class—or monastics living in relative ease—
and generally residing in Europe or North America. But in the second half
of that century, new theological tendencies emerged, and these would have
an impact on the fields of theology and biblical hermeneutics throughout
the world. The general name often given to these new forms of theology is
“contextual theologies.” This title is both correct and misleading. These are
truly contextual theologies in that they take their own particular contexts
very seriously, and seek both to address them and to use them as tools to
develop their own understanding of Scripture and of theology. But the name
itself is misleading in that it implies that the more traditional theologies are
not themselves contextual—that they have somehow been given quite apart
from the settings of various theologians, or of their culture, class, gender,
and ethnicity. Thus, most “contextual theologians” would agree that their
work is indeed contextual, but would insist that the same is true of every
theological enterprise and of every interpretation of Scripture.
    While agreeing on affirming their own contextuality, these new
theologies vary widely according to the various contexts in which they
develop and from which they speak. Also, most of these theologies agree
that the gospel is a message of liberation—particularly, in each case, a
message of liberation for those in their own particular context—and
therefore are commonly called theologies of liberation. Thus, besides Black
theology, which has been mentioned earlier, late in the twentieth century
and early in the twenty-first many other theologies of liberation flourished
—Latin American, Korean, South African, Feminist. There were also
various combinations of these—for instance, black women would call theirs
a “womanist theology,” while some Latinas in the United States would call
theirs “mujerista theology.”
    Since it is impossible to discuss these various theologies—and their
complex interaction—in any detail, a quick overview of some of its main
examples must suffice. It is in referring to Latin America that the term
“liberation theology” is most often used, based on the publication in 1971
of the book Teología de la liberación: Perspectivas, by Peruvian Catholic
theologian Gustavo Gutiérrez (1928–), followed by the work of others who
seek to interpret the gospel as well as Scripture within the context of social
and economic oppression—theologians such as Brazilians Ivonne Gebara
(Augustinian) and Leonardo Boff (Franciscan), the Uruguayan Juan Luis
Segundo (Jesuit), and the Argentinian José Míguez Bonino (Methodist).
Many of these theologians make use of a Marxist—some would prefer to
say “Marxian,” in order to avoid the implication of Communism—
analytical method in order to lay bare the degree to which traditional
theological and biblical interpretations reflect the often unacknowledged
interests of those who write theology and of their social class. Their
theology is paralleled by the explosive growth of Comunidades eclesiales
de base—C.E.B.s or basic ecclesial communities—that gather in small
groups in order to discuss both the conditions in which they live and how
the gospel and Scripture relate to those conditions. Their method is often
characterized by three steps, ver, juzgar, and actuar—seeing, judging, and
acting—which means to begin by describing a situation, then analyze its
causes, connections, etc., and finally act on the matter on the basis of the
gospel and Christian faith. Since there are tens of thousands of these
C.E.B.s throughout the region, they are a source of renewed vitality within
Latin American Catholicism. Since much of their leadership is lay, they also
help provide some level of community and ministry for believers whose
connection with the church has often been tenuous because of the extreme
scarcity of priests that has plagued Latin American Catholicism for decades.
As for liberation theology itself, twice then Cardinal Ratzinger—later Pope
Benedict XVI—issued documents against it, and twice its leading voices
declared that such condemnations did not describe them accurately, and
therefore did not apply to them. Then, with the fall of the Soviet Union and
the ensuing discredit of Marxist Communism, many predicted the decline of
this sort of theology. But, more that twenty years after the demise of the
Soviet Union, Latin American liberation theology is still strong and even
spreading.
    Similar theologies have developed elsewhere. In South Korea, under the
leadership of Ahn Byungmu and others, Minjung theology developed as
part of the Minjung movement—meaning the people’s movement. In South
Africa, Allan Boesak, president of the World Alliance of Reformed
Churches from 1982 to 1991, developed a theology specifically addressing
the issues of apartheid. Elsewhere in Africa, theologians such as Kwame
Bediako sought to relate the Christian faith with traditional African culture,
often suppressed by earlier preaching. In the United States, James Cone and
others developed Black theology, based on the African-American
experience of oppression and the hope of total liberation. Within that
context, Jacqueline Grant and Delores Williams became known for their
womanist theology—theology from the perspective of African-American
women—and Ada María Isasi-Díaz for her proposal of a Mujerista
theology, from the perspective of Latinas in the United States. Likewise,
Virgilio Elizondo employed the image and experience of Galileans in first-
century Palestine to interpret the Latino experience in the United States.
While many theologians of European extraction, in both Europe and the
United States, were extremely critical of such contextual theologies, others
—notably German theologian Jürgen Moltmann—supported them and
incorporated their insights into their own thought and writings.

             MISSION FROM THE ENDS OF THE EARTH
The missionary enterprise has always declared that its purpose is to found
indigenous and mature churches in various parts of the world. In Roman
Catholic circles, this has traditionally meant the planting of a church with
its own hierarchy—and eventually a native one. Among Protestants, the
goal has often been expressed in terms of the “three selves”: self-
government, self-support, and self-propagation. In most of these early
formulations, however, it was taken for granted—by both Catholics and
Protestants—that Christian theology in general would have little to learn
from the younger churches. At most, it was hoped that these various
churches would express Western theology in terms of their own cultural
setting. But the ecumenical movement, the end of colonialism, and a
growing self-assurance on the part of the younger churches have produced
unexpected results, for some of those churches are posing questions and
offering answers that offer, not a mere adaptation, but a challenge to much
of traditional theology. As we have seen when discussing the various
contextual theologies that have recently emerged, what makes these
theologies different is not only their cultural settings, but also that they take
into account the social and economic struggles of the oppressed.
    Among Catholics, the most surprising and far-reaching developments
were taking place in Latin America. In El Salvador, Archbishop Oscar A.
Romero was slain by those who considered him a threat to the established
order. In Brazil, Hélder Câmara and Paulo Evaristo Arns led the bishops
who called for a new order. In Nicaragua, there was a growing
confrontation between the Sandinista regime and the episcopacy. In
Guatemala and other countries, Catholic lay catechists by the hundreds
were killed by those who considered them subversive. In the United States
and Europe, some declared that the new theology was anathema, while
many theologians and Christian leaders declared that its call for a new look
at the radical implications of the gospel was justified.
   While all this is taking place, it is also evident that the North is
becoming increasingly de-Christianized, while the greatest numeric gains of
the church are taking place in the South. Likewise, churches in the South
that have long been considered dormant—including the Catholic Church in
Latin America—are registering an unexpected vitality. Therefore, no matter
how one reacts to the various emerging theologies of the Third World, it
seems likely that the twenty-first century will be marked by a vast
missionary enterprise from the South to the North. Thus, the lands that a
century before were considered the “ends of the earth” will have an
opportunity to witness to the descendants of those who earlier witnessed to
them.
                                     38

              Epilogue: A Global History


   But rereading history means remaking history. It means repairing it
   from the bottom up. And so it will be a subversive history. . . . What
   is criminal is not to be subversive . . . but to continue being
   superversive—bolstering and supporting the prevailing domination.
   It is in this subversive history that we can have a new faith
   experience, a new spirituality—a new proclamation of the gospel.
                                                       GUSTAVO GUTIÉRREZ


                A NEW MAP BEYOND CHRISTENDOM
The vitality of Christianity in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the islands
of the Pacific, and its parallel crisis in the North Atlantic, meant that the
map of Christendom which served as the stage for the history of
Christianity until the mid-twentieth century is no longer operational in the
first decades of the twenty-first. That earlier map was drawn in terms of
Christendom, lands in Europe and the Western hemisphere that were
traditionally and predominantly Christian, and were then the centers of
mission to the rest of the world. By the end of the twentieth century,
however, things had changed so radically that the former map had become
obsolete. There were now new centers in every continent, resulting in a map
of Christianity that, rather than seeing it as having its base in the West, and
from there expanding outward, sees Christianity as a polycentric reality,
where many areas that had earlier been peripheral have become new
centers.
    Such changes in the map of Christianity have occurred before. In the late
first century, and for another two hundred and fifty years, Christianity,
earlier centered in Jerusalem, spread throughout the Roman Empire creating
new centers in Antioch, Alexandria, Ephesus, Carthage, and Rome. At the
same time, it was spreading eastward, developing centers in Edessa,
Armenia, and India—even though most historians of the church, writing
from a Western perspective, often paid little attention to those other areas.
Then the Muslim invasions overran many of the older centers of
Christianity—Antioch, Alexandria, Carthage—so that Western Europe now
became the center of mission as well as of theological activity. In the
sixteenth century, missionary activity centered in Spain and Portugal, while
theological debate and innovation had their centers in northern Europe. In
the nineteenth, with the growth of the British and other European empires,
and of North American neocolonialism, the center shifted to the North
Atlantic, so that most Protestant missionary work in the rest of the world
came from London and New York, and its Catholic counterpart had its base
in Paris and Brussels.
    What is unprecedented in the changes that took place late in the
twentieth century and early in the twenty-first is that the new map of
Christianity does not have one center, but many. Financial resources are still
concentrated in the North Atlantic, as are educational and other institutions.
But theological creativity is no longer limited to that area. What is written
in Korea, Peru, or the Philippines is read in the rest of the world, and often
is as influential as what is published in New York, London, or San
Francisco. The ecumenical movement is no longer limited to the World
Council of Churches and its offices in Geneva, but has many counterparts in
various regions of the world—some of them related to the World Council,
and some not. The international missionary enterprise, which earlier
radiated from New York and London, now is a complex network, with
missionaries from Korea working in Argentina, the Dominican Republic,
and the United States, Peruvians working in Japan, Puerto Ricans in New
York, Africans in Ireland and in England, Indians in Sri Lanka and the
United States, and so on. Thus, the new map of Christianity is truly a
worldwide map, one far beyond the very notion of Christendom on which
earlier maps were drawn.
   Yet the challenge to our earlier maps is not only geographical and
sociopolitical. It is also religious and intellectual. If it is true that there is no
longer a Christendom because Christianity has expanded throughout the
world, it is also true that there is no longer a Christendom because even in
the traditionally Christian lands there are a variety of religions. Some of
these are the result of the vast migrations that have characterized the most
recent decades. Others are the result of a widespread interest in the occult,
and even in religious views—such as Gnosticism—that seemed long dead.




  Gnosticism, long presumed dead, is now being hailed as true knowledge, and the occult is often
     combined with it in a myriad ways that the ancient Gnostics would not have recognized.

    Intellectually, the challenge is equally serious. The demise of
colonialism and the resurgence of a variety of cultures and views are among
the many factors leading many to proclaim that modernity is a matter of the
past, and we are now living in post-modernity. This may be a premature
statement, for there are still many signs of the power of modernity. But
there is no doubt that many of the certainties of modernity are passing, that
for growing numbers of people the world is no longer the closed,
mechanistic system of modernity, that we are becoming increasingly aware
of the need to define and redefine terms, that various cultural and
perspectives that modernity suppressed are once again coming to the
surface. This will present Christianity with the opportunity to engage the
post-modern world in a new way, but also with the challenge to do so in a
way that is faithful to its own nature. In the coming post-modern world,
being a Christian and proclaiming the gospel will be both a challenge and
an adventure.

                THE FUTURE OF SHAPE OF HISTORY
We thus come to the end of our narrative as far as we can carry it—to the
present day. It is a complex narrative, with its ups and downs, its times of
trial, and its times of glory. But, as every history, it is an unfinished
narrative, for we too, with our own confusion, our ups and downs, our times
of trial and our times of glory, are now becoming part of the story. But it is
not only as the most recent, still unwritten chapter, that we are part of the
story. We are also part of it because we are its narrators. It is we who, from
our own twenty-first century perspectives, shape and interpret the entire
story even as we retell it. And therefore, as we come to the (temporary) end
of our narrative, we must ask, what may be some of the ways in which the
story as told in the twenty-first century will differ from the story as told
earlier? What might emerge as the distinguishing marks of Christian
history, when told from the perspective of the end of the twenty-first
century?
   This graffito on a wall in Puerto Rico illustrates the degree to which post-modernity challenges
earlier definitions. Quite likely both the person who originally wrote “Christ is not religion,” and the
one who attempted to blot out the “not,” are faithful Christians seeking to give witness to their faith.

   To this question, my immediate answer is that a twenty-first history of
Christianity must be global. We certainly need monographs on the history
of specific denominations and movements, as well as on particular areas,
and on Christian responses to various challenges and opportunities. But all
of these must be part of a global perspective. We can no longer write the
history of Christianity as if its culmination were our own particular
expression of the faith. We must write in full recognition that our
understandings and expressions of Christianity—whatever they may be—
are but part of a varied kaleidoscope that includes many lands and cultures,
many traditions, many forms of worship, and many theological expressions.
   “Global,” however, is more than a geographical matter. Our new global
narrative must include those who have traditionally been excluded, no
matter where they live. The new narrative must be global both in its
horizontal, geographic dimension—covering all lands and peoples—and in
a vertical, sociological dimension—acknowledging the faith, the lives, and
the struggles of those whose story is too often excluded from the wider
narrative. This includes women in most parts of the world—and certainly in
most branches of the church—the poor, the uneducated, ethnic and cultural
minorities, and any others who for whatever reason are considered less
worthy of attention.
   Finally, the new global narrative of the story of Christianity must be
mission-centered. For decades, I have argued that the history of missions
should not be a field apart from general church history but must be
incorporated into it. There is no reason why the Protestant Reformation of
the sixteenth century should be part of “church history,” while the work that
the Jesuits were performing in India at the same time is considered part of
the “history of missions.” I remain convinced that we need to combine these
two traditionally separate fields; but now I have come to an even broader
conclusion that it is time for historians of Christianity to explore the
possibility of a narrative, so to speak, not from the center to the periphery
but from the periphery to the center. After all, most likely not one book of
the New Testament was written in Jerusalem! Christianity, like most living
organisms, grows and relates to its environment at the edges, while the
edges nurture the center and keep it alive.
    This twenty-first century, this age “beyond Christendom,” when
Christianity no longer has clear centers, offers the opportunity to begin
looking at the story of Christianity in a radically new way. How would that
history look if we focused on those who heard the message for the first time
at any given moment? What attracted or repelled them? How did this shape
their own reception and interpretation of the faith? What did an average
Roman hear when the gospel was first proclaimed to her? How did this
affect the way the message was preached and interpreted? What did the
Chinese hear when the Nestorians brought their witness to them? How did
this affect the message? How is Muslim criticism of Christianity reflected
in the iconoclastic controversy, or in Thomas Aquinas’s Summa contra
gentiles? How did the experience of exile shape Calvin’s Institutes? What
did the Aztec population understand when the first Franciscan missionaries
spoke to them? How have women heard a gospel preached mostly by men?
All of these are crucial questions that open new vistas to the entire field of
church history.
    The story is not finished. There is still much to do, much to learn, and
much to write! Among the readers of this Story of Christianity will there be
some who will take up this task? I hope and I pray to the God of all history
that it may be so!




                    Suggested Readings


Sydney E. Ahlstrom. A Religious History of the American People. Second
  edition, David D. Hall, ed. Hew Haven: Yale University Press, 2004.
John Bagnell Bury. History of the Papacy in the 19th Century: Liberty and
  Authority in the Roman Catholic Church. New York: Schocken Books,
  1964.
Carlos F. Cardoza-Orlandi and Justo L. González. A History of the
  Christian Missionary Movement. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 2011.
Justo L. González. The Changing Shape of Church History. St. Louis:
  Chalice Press, 2002.
Ondina W. González and Justo L. González. Christianity in Latin America:
  A History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
August B. Hasler. How the Pope Became Infallible: Pius IX and the
  Politics of Persuasion. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1981.
Gerrie ten Har. How God Became African: African Spirituality and
  Western Secular Thought. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
  Press, 2006.
Alasdair I. C. Heron. A Century of Protestant Theology. Philadelphia:
  Westminster, 1980.
Philip Jenkins. The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global Christianity.
  New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.
Kenneth Scott Latourette. Christianity in a Revolutionary Age, vols. 4–5.
  New York: Harper & Row, 1961–1962.
Stephen Neill, ed. Twentieth Century Christianity. London: Collins, 1961.
Mark Noll. The New Shape of World Christianity: How American
  Experience Reflects Global Faith. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity
  Press, 2009.
John O’Malley. What Happened at Vatican Two. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
  University Press, 2008.
Carla Gaudina Pestana. Protestant Empire: Religion and the Making of the
  British Atlantic World. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
  2009.
Ruth Rouse and Stephen Neill, eds. A History of the Ecumenical
  Movement, 1517–1948. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1968.
Lamin Sanneh. Translating the Message. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books,
  2008.
L. S. Stavrianos. Global Rift: The Third World Comes of Age. New York:
  William Morrow and Company, 1981.
                                 Notes


CHAPTER   1
1. “Epistle to Laurinus,” February 1, 1523.

CHAPTER 2
2. Opera 17:580.

CHAPTER  7
3. “Preface to the Commentary on the Psalms,” Opera 31:22.
4. “Preface to the Commentary on the Psalms,” Opera 31:26.

CHAPTER  12
5. Autobiography 1.10.
6. Autobiography 3.22–3.24.
7. Autobiography 3.27.

CHAPTER  23
8. Apology to Tilken, 2:298.

CHAPTER   24
9. Selbstzeugnisse (“Testimonies”), p. 25.
10. Journal, February 7, 1736.
11. Journal, May 24, 1738.

CHAPTER  26
12. Statistics taken from David K. Barrett et al., eds., World Christian
     Encyclopedia (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001), vol. 1, table 1-
     4.
CHAPTER  27
13. The Austin Papers, ed. Eugene C. Barker (Washington, D.C.:
     Government Printing Office, 1919), 3:345, 347.
14. Speech of John Quincy Adams, May 25, 1836 (Washington, D.C.: Gales
     and Seaton, 1838), p. 119.
15. Memoirs, quoted in W. S. McFeely, Grant: A Biography (New York:
     Norton, 1981), p. 30.
16. Quoted in Sydney E. Ahlstrom, A Religious History of the American
     People, vol. 2 (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1975), p. 327.

CHAPTER 29
17. Simón Bolívar, Obras completas. vol. 3 (Havana: Lex, 1950), p. 501.

CHAPTER  31
18. Frederich Schleiermacher, The Christian Faith (Edinburgh: T. & T.
     Clark, 1928), p. 151.

CHAPTER 32
19. Tr. by H. E. Manning, 1871; quoted in Schaff, The Creeds of
    Christendom. vol. 2 (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1878), pp. 270–
    71.

CHAPTER  36
20. H. Richard Niebuhr, The Social Sources of Denominationalism. 1959
     reprint (New York: Meridian), p. 21.
21. Niebuhr, The Social Sources, p. 275.
22. H. Richard Niebuhr, The Kingdom of God in America. (New York:
     Harper & Brothers, 1937), p. 193.
23. A Religious History of the American People, vol. 2 (New York:
     Doubleday, 1975), p. 451.
26. Ronald J. Sider, ed. The Chicago Declaration (Carol Stream, Illinois:
     Creation House, 1974), cover and pp. 1–2.
                                  Index


The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from
which it was created. To locate a specific entry, please use your e-book
reader’s search tools.

Page numbers of illustrations appear in italics.

Abolitionism, 326, 330, 333, 344, 347, 361, 432, 434, 438, 487
Abortion, 448
Africa, 162, 304, 306, 309, 432, 433, 435, 435, 471, 503–7, 505, 521–22,
 525; Catholicism, 311, 431–33, 497, 503; ecumenism, 507; liberation
 theology, 521–22; missionaries, 263, 335, 420, 431, 433–36, 434;
 Pentecostals, 505–7, 506
African Americans, 252, 313, 334, 484–87, 485, 486, 520; black theology,
 486–87, 520, 522; churches, 334–36, 335, 483; new religions, 484;
 Pentecostals, 340
Ahn Byungmu, 521
Allen, Richard, 335
America, Colonial, 256–57, 275–91, 319–26, 321; Anglicans, 273, 278–79,
 286, 289, 320, 322, 419; Baptists, 282–86, 322; Catholics, 286–87, 278,
 286–87; Eastern Orthodoxy, 325; Great Awakening, 288–89; immigration,
 323–26; Lutherans, 325; Methodists, 272, 273, 278–79, 289–90, 322;
 Mid-Atlantic colonies, 287–88; Moravians, 263; New England, 276, 279–
 86, 289, 320–22, 326; Pilgrims, 280–81, 281, 325; Puritans, 279–84;
 Quakers, 256–57; religious freedom, 276, 280, 287–88, 281; Revolution,
 319–23; Unitarianism and Universalism, 320–22; witchcraft trials, 282–
 83; women in, 283
Ames, Nathaniel, 301
Anabaptists, 42, 64, 67–76, 68, 72, 110, 116, 117, 183, 196, 325
Angelique, Mother, 215
Anglicanism, 89–90, 97–98, 194, 195, 196, 200, 204, 268–69, 271–72, 277,
 360–61, 419, 437, 449, 496–97, 498, 504, 514, 519; in America, 273,
 278–79, 286, 289, 320, 322; Thirty-nine Articles, 97–98, 209
Anglo-Catholics, 360
Apocalyptic movements, 9, 72–73, 189–90, 261, 346, 473, 491
Aquinas, Thomas, 148, 237, 453, 530
Aristotelianism, 54, 237–38
Armenian Church, 377, 379
Arminianism, 195, 229–33, 268, 285
Arminius, Jacobus, 229
Arnauld, Antoine, 215–16
Arnold, Gottfried, 140
Arns, Paulo Evaristo, 523
Asbury, Francis, 273, 278, 322
Asia and Oceania, 162, 303, 306, 420, 421–31, 426, 428, 471, 498–500,
 499, 525
Assemblies of God, 340, 510
Assyrian Christians, 378
Augsburg, 30, 46; Confession, 45, 45–46, 177; Diet of, 44; Interim, 108–10,
 223; Peace of, 177
Aulén, Gustav, 458
Augustine, St., 43, 64, 80, 211, 214, 215, 231
Australia, 430–31
Austria, 31, 40, 44, 45, 68, 110, 153, 352, 355–59, 405, 448
Azusa Street revival, 340, 341, 489, 505, 509, 510

Baius, Michael, 215
Ballarmine, Robert, 139–40, 139
Báñez, Domingo, 214
Baptism, 52–54, 64, 67–70, 74, 195, 278, 281–82, 289, 510
Baptists, 195, 207, 279, 285–86, 289–90, 322, 326–37, 359, 418–20, 422–
 24, 437; Southern Baptist Convention, 333
Baronius, Caesar, 139, 140, 149
Barth, Karl, 458–62, 459, 463, 465, 478, 480, 516
Baur, F. C., 395–96
Bediako, Kwame, 521–22
Belgium, 115, 123, 355; Congo, 432, 433
Beza, Theodore, 84, 229
Bible, 9, 41, 61, 98, 326, 424, 460–61; authority of, 48, 61, 67, 73, 225,
 233, 342, 408, 476; English, 92–93; historical, 341, 408, 414; inerrancy,
 68, 342, 343, 476; Karoly and Vizsoly, 158; King James, 198; law and
 gospel, 51–52; Luther’s, 37–38, 49, 158; myth and, 468, 469; Polygot,
 137, 152; Reina-Valera, 153–54, 153; Scofield, 343; translations, 137,
 139, 159, 232, 423, 425, 439; Vulgate, 9, 137, 148, 226
Billy Sunday, 474
Bismarck, Otto von, 358, 401, 405
Blaurock, George, 69
Bloch, Ernst, 467
Boehme, Jakob, 250–51, 257
Boehmenists, 251, 254
Boesak, Allan, 504, 521
Boff, Leonardo, 521
Bohemia, 9, 30, 159, 178–82, 179, 199
Böhm, Hans, 9
Bolívar, Simón, 363, 365, 365
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich, 457, 463–65, 464, 468
Bonino, José Míguez, 521
Booth, William and Catherine Munford, 338
Bossuet, Jacques, 218–19
Bradstreet, Anne, 283
Brent, Charles H., 514, 515
Brunner, Emil, 461
Bucer, Martin, 64, 68, 82, 85, 107, 154
Bullinger, Heinrich, 62, 101
Bultmann, Rudolf, 461, 463, 468, 469
Bunyan, John, 209

Calixtus, George, 226–28, 227
Calovius, Abraham, 225, 228
Calvin, John, 65, 68, 77–86, 79, 83, 101, 125, 159, 165, 215, 221, 223–24,
 235, 260, 459; Institutes, 78–80, 81, 85, 86, 459
Calvinism, 77, 85–86, 97, 98, 116, 121, 123, 159, 175, 177, 193–209, 214,
 223–24, 229–35, 251, 260–61, 268, 285, 289, 459; Westminster
 Confession, 233–35, 234, 282
Câmara, Hélder, 508, 523
Camisards, 190
Campbell, Alexander, 323
Campbell, Thomas, 323
Canada, 275, 287, 302, 322, 339, 495, 518
Capitalism, 165, 307, 311, 312, 343, 355, 359, 370, 387, 407, 417, 466,
 479, 481, 509, 517
Carey, William, 418, 419, 422–23, 423, 430, 439, 497, 519
Caribbean, 255, 263, 276, 302, 313, 322, 361, 506
Cartesianism, 238–40, 246, 247
Catherine de Medici, 101, 126, 127–29, 131
Catholic Action, 409
Catholicism, 7–11, 26–28, 441–55; in Africa 431–33, 503–4; Anglo-
 Catholics, 360; in Asia, 421, 496–97, 498; in Belgium, 356; conciliarists,
 7–8, 146, 147, 164, 489; ecumenism, 228, 517–18; England’s break from,
 89–92, 98; fascism and, 308, 409–10, 412, 413; in France, 351, 352, 353,
 351–55; in Germany, 44, 46, 358, 362 (see also Hapsburg dynasty); Great
 Schism, 7–8, 27; growth of, 455, 524; indulgences, 24–26, 28, 60, 148; in
 Latin America, 367–72, 507–9, 521, 522–24, 523, 524; missionaries,
 420–21, 522–24; modernity and, 315, 361–62, 399–416, 441, 446, 469;
 orthodoxy of, 174, 175, 211–19; in Poland, 160; Protestant hostilities, 56,
 62, 94–95, 105–7, 119–23, 144, 147 (see also Thirty Years’ War); renewal
 of, 454–55; sexual abuse and, 448, 449; Syllabus of Errors, 402–3, 409; in
 the U.S., 162, 286–87, 324–25, 329, 331–32, 334, 337; Vatican I, 403–4,
 404, 345, 44, 442; Vatican II, 413, 414, 415, 441, 443–47, 444, 452, 454,
 509, 517. See also Papacy Catholic Reformation, 12, 39, 60–61, 135–49;
 Council of Trent, 147–49, 162, 411, 413, 441; new orders, 140–45;
 polemics against Protestantism, 138–40; in Spain, 135–38
C.E.B.s, 521
C.E.L.A.M., 414, 508–9
Celibacy/married clergy, 60, 93, 94, 332, 449
Central America, 302, 365–66, 491
Charismatic movement, 438, 498, 497, 500, 501, 505, 506, 518
Chemnitz, Martin, 224
Cherbury, Sir Herbert, 242
Chicago Declaration, 473, 489
China, 303, 304, 309, 311, 412, 421, 425–27, 427, 499–500, 499, 501, 501,
 518; Boxer Rebellion, 306, 427–28, 428, 498; missionaries in, 306, 377,
 378, 409, 421, 425–27, 450, 498, 500, 502
Christian Science, 344, 346–47
Church, 164, 165, 211; as body of Christ, 452, 460; Calvin’s orders, 83;
 decline vs. growth, 317, 460, 467–68, 470–71, 496–97; history, 140, 149,
 395–97, 527–30; mother church, 52; as the people of God, 446; state and,
 55–56, 64, 67, 69–76, 84, 151–60, 163, 177–91, 183, 284, 317, 405, 448–
 49; unity of, 19, 163, 193, 323, 438, 443, 497–98, 512–20
Church of England. See Anglicanism Church of the Nazarene, 338
Cobb, John, 488
Coligny, Gaspard, 128, 129, 130, 130, 131
Colonialism. See specific countries
Communion, 43, 54, 61, 70, 74, 85–86, 93, 97, 165, 192, 268, 271, 272,
 360; in both kinds, 38, 61, 93, 148–49; Formula of Concord, 224;
 presence of Christ in, 45, 54–55, 64, 65, 85, 223–24, 228
Communism, 308, 311, 312, 375, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 448, 466, 470,
 480, 481, 489, 507, 509, 517, 521
Comte, Auguste, 370, 386, 387
Condé, Louis de, 127, 130
Condorcet, Antoine-Nicolas de, 349
Cone, James, 486–87, 522
Confessing Church, 463, 516
Congar, Yves, 452–53
Congregationalism, 289, 320, 322, 326, 337, 360, 419–20, 424, 471
Constantine, 67, 84, 163
Constantinople, 9, 156, 160, 161, 373, 374–75, 376, 378, 381, 431, 449
Consubstantiation, 54–55
Contextual theologies, 520–22
Cook, James, 430–31, 430
Coptic Church, 378–79
Court, Antoine, 183, 190–91
Cox, Harvey, 488
Cranmer, Thomas, 89–96
Crowther, Samuel, 435–36
Czechoslovakia, 312, 375, 466, 467, 470

Daly, Mary, 487
Daniélou, Jean, 452
Deism, 241–42, 244, 247, 252
De Lubac, Henri, 451–52
Denmark, 110–13, 179, 262, 359, 419
Denominationalism, 322–23
Descartes, René, 237, 238–40
Diangienda, Joseph, 506
Diggers, 207
Disciples of Christ, 323, 438–39
Dispensationalism, 343
Dort, Synod of, 229, 232–33; tulip, 233
Duff, Alexander, 423–24
Dwight, Timothy, 326

Eastern Christianity, 373–83. See also Orthodox Church Eck, John, 31, 106,
  139
Ecumenism, 227, 228, 323, 379–80, 413, 421, 438–40, 442, 445–46, 449,
  453, 458, 481, 489–90, 496, 497, 498, 500, 507, 512–22, 526; Church of
  Christ synod, 518; Lusanne Covenant, 519–20; Student Christian
  Movement, 514; World Missionary Conference, 439, 440, 512, 513–14
Eddy, Mary Baker, 346–47
Education, 14, 43, 61, 83, 90, 95, 102, 249, 283, 314, 327, 334, 367, 403,
  420, 424, 430, 437–38, 466, 482, 497, 504, 515, 526; of clergy, 8, 98, 148,
  191, 213, 328, 332, 377, 380, 402, 408, 413, 500, 507
Edwards, Jonathan, 288, 289, 290, 326
Egalitarianism, 70, 196, 309
Egede, Hans, 263
Eliot, John, 283
Elizondo, Virgilio, 522
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 321
Emperors: Charles V, 30–31, 33, 34–35, 37–40, 44, 46, 60, 62, 70, 88, 92,
  96, 105, 106–11, 115–17, 146–47, 152–53, 156, 162, 164, 173, 179;
  Ferdinand, I, 110, 157, 158, 162; Ferdinand II, 178–79, 180–82;
  Ferdinand III, 182; Joseph II, 212; Maximilian I, 28–29, 30; Maximilian
  II, 110, 131; Rudolf II, 177
Empiricism, 240–44, 246, 247
Engels, Friedrich, 357
England. See Great Britain
English monarchs: Charles I, 199–207, 202, 277, 280, 286; Charles II, 207–
  9, 255, 285; Edward VI, 92, 93–94, 101; Elizabeth I, 92, 96–99, 101, 102,
  104, 121, 131, 193, 195–96, 277; Henry VII, 87, 101; Henry VIII, 87–93,
  89, 96, 97, 99, 173, 205; James I, 103, 180, 193–99, 197, 209; James II,
  209, 281, 287; Mary Tudor, 88, 90, 93, 94–96, 95, 97, 98; William and
  Mary, 209
Ephrata community, 325
Episcopal Church, 322, 438, 514; of Haiti, 437. See also Anglicanism
  Erasmus, 14–18, 15, 43, 57, 116, 152, 222
Ethiopia, 432; Church of, 379; Orthodox Church, 503
Evangelicalism, 178, 342, 360, 383, 419, 462, 482–83, 487, 489–90, 512,
  519–20; Evangelical Alliance, 336–38, 342; Evangelical Orthodox
  Church, 383
Evolutionism, 315, 341, 342, 386, 448–51, 475–76, 476
Existentialism, 395, 453, 461, 468, 480

Faith, 53, 223, 230, 231, 241, 393, 468; justification by, 25, 43, 47, 51, 54,
 62, 77, 222–23, 228, 260
Faith and Order, 379, 439, 440, 514, 515, 516
Farel, William, 81–82, 84
Fascism, 308–9, 409–10, 412, 413, 448, 480, 481
Febronianism, 212–13, 219
Fénelon, François, 218–19
Fox, George, 249, 251–55, 252, 257, 258, 278
Fox, Margaret Fell, 253, 255
Foxe, John, 94–95
France, 356; Bourbons, 127, 129, 130, 132–33, 186, 213, 214, 355;
  Catholicism in, 182, 185–91, 212, 249–55, 358, 399–401, 405, 413;
  colonies, 275, 302, 304, 424, 432–33; Edict of Fontainebleu, 189; Edict of
  Nantes, 134, 151, 163, 185, 189; French Revolution, 189, 191, 213, 219,
  246, 301, 349–55, 358, 366, 399–401; Guises, 99, 101, 127–33;
  Huguenots, 104, 127–32, 130, 134, 155, 185, 186–87, 189, 190, 232, 256;
  Inquisition, 84; Jansenism in, 215–17; Jesuits, 213, 214; Napoleonic
  Wars, 302, 323, 352, 355; Protestantism in, 125–34, 182, 185–91;
  Quietism in, 218–19; rationalism, 238–40, 246; Reformed Church, 86,
  190–91, 471; St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre, 104, 128–31, 130;
  Scottish alliance, 99–101; Thirty Years’ War, 182; Voltaire and, 245–46;
  war of three Henrys, 131–34
France, monarchs of: Charles IX, 127, 129, 131; Charles X, 356; Francis I,
  30–31, 39, 40, 44, 46, 60, 78, 92, 125; Henry II, 109, 126–27; Henry III,
  127, 129, 131–32, 133; Henry IV, 129–34, 173–74, 183–84, 212; Louis
  XIII, 183, 199, 232; Louis XIV, 155, 187–88, 190, 216, 219, 245; Louis
  XV, 190; Louis XVI, 191, 349, 351; Louis XVIII, 355–56
Francke, August Hermann, 261–62
Franco, Francisco, 308, 410, 413
Frederick the Wise, 30, 31, 32, 37–38, 106, 107
Free churches, 359
Free will, 43, 44, 268
Freethinkers, 241–42
Freud, Sigmund, 387–88
Fundamentalism, 322, 342–43, 438, 473–77, 475, 480, 492

Galileo, 13, 140, 165, 238
Gallicanism, 187, 211–14, 217, 219, 351, 354, 405
Gebara, Ivonne, 521
Geneva, 68, 80–85, 83, 101, 125, 153–54, 156, 229; Academy, 84
Gerhardt, Johann, 225
Gerhardt, Paul, 221
Germany, 40–41, 72, 362, 419; in Africa, 432; Anabaptists and, 71;
 Bavaria, 177–78; Catholicism in, 44, 46, 64–65, 177–78, 405; Evangelical
 Church, 462–63; Interim, 108–10; Luther’s Bible and, 38, 49, 158; Peace
 of Nuremberg, 46, 105; Pietism, 259–62; Protestantism, 105–10, 158,
 174, 177–84, 179, 181, 183, 199, 362, 466, 470–71; Prussia, 352, 355–58;
 Reformation, 19–56, 64–65; reunification, 470, 471; Thirty Years’ War,
 110, 158, 174, 177–84, 179, 181, 183, 187, 466; War of Schmalkalden,
 105–7; unification, 355, 359; WWI and aftermath, 457–62; WWII and
 Nazism, 308–10, 410–12, 462–65, 466, 481, 516; See also Luther, Martin
 Gnosticism, 315, 346, 527, 527
God, 257; Barth’s views, 460, 461; Bloch’s hope and, 467; “death of,” 488;
 Eternal Decree, 234; existence, 238, 240–41, 244, 246–47, 388, 466;
 knowledge of, 48, 50, 51, 65, 77, 80; law and gospel, 51; nature of, 63
Gogarten, Friedrich, 461
Gomarus, Francis, 229–32
Gonzaga, Giulia, 156
Grace, 22, 51, 63, 74, 80, 144, 149, 211, 214–17, 231–33, 234, 235, 249,
 260, 261, 288, 458, 461, 479
Graham, Billy, 482–83, 519
Grant, Jacqueline, 522
Great Awakening, 262, 264, 286, 288–90
Great Britain: American churches and, 272, 278, 279, 280, 287, 322;
 American independence, 319–20, 322; Anglicans, 89–90, 97–98, 194–96,
 200, 204, 268–69, 271–72, 277, 360–61, 419, 437, 449, 496–98, 504, 514,
 519; Baptists, 195; Bohemenists, 251; Book of Common Prayer, 93–94,
 97, 194, 208; Catholics, 94–98, 146; Calvinism, 196, 232, 233–35; Civil
 War, 204–7; colonialism, 275–88, 302, 304, 329, 421–28, 430–32, 436,
 497; Deism, 241–42; ecumenism, 526; Empiricism, 240–44; Gunpowder
 Plot, 198; humanism, 16; immigration to, 313; Long Parliament, 201–3;
 Methodism, 264–73, 321, 338; 19th century, 359–61; Protestantism, 94–
 95, 121, 131, 175, 179–80, 189, 361, 361–62, 367; Puritan Revolution
 and Cromwell, 193–209, 205, 276; Quakers, 251–57; Reformation, 9, 65,
 86, 87–104, 146; Reformed Church, 65; reformism, 356; Restoration,
 208–9; Salvation Army, 338; secularism, 457–58; 467; women, 269–71,
 269–70, 313; WWII, 309; YMCA and YWCA, 337
Great Depression, 307, 477–78
Grebel, Conrad, 67, 69
Grotius, Hugo, 231–32, 233
Grumbach, Argula von, 32
Grundtvig, N. F. S., 359
Guelincx, Arnold, 239
Gustavus Adolphus, 180–82
Guatavus Vasa, 112–13
Gutiérrez, Gustavo, 521, 525
Guyon, Madame, 218

Haiti, 302, 366, 437, 507
Hapsburg dynasty, 62, 94, 105, 108, 110, 115, 157–58, 179, 180–83, 183,
 185, 186, 187, 199, 214
Harnack, Adolf von, 396, 458
Hegelianism, 377, 390–93, 391, 395
Heidegger, Martin, 453, 468
Helwys, Thomas, 195
Henry of Guise, 132
Hitler, Adolph, 308, 410–11, 462, 463, 464, 480, 481
Hoffman, Melchior, 72–74, 116
Holiness churches, 338–39, 339, 483, 489
Holly, James Theodore, 437
Holy Spirit, 85, 159, 225, 226, 231, 234, 251, 268, 340, 447, 518
Homosexuality, 196, 449
Hoover, Willis, 509–10
Hope, theology of, 467, 488
Hromádka, Joseph, 466–67, 516
Hugo, Victor, 219
Huguenots, 104, 127–32, 130, 134, 155, 185, 186–87, 189, 190, 232, 256
Humanism, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 27, 32, 44, 57, 59, 62, 77–78, 90, 93, 116,
 126, 136, 139, 152, 154, 222, 235
Hume, David, 173, 242–44, 243, 246
Hungary, 86, 157–58, 159, 466, 470
Huss, John, 9, 21, 30, 32, 78, 466
Hussites, 30, 99, 159, 178, 263
Hutchinson, Anne, 284–85

Ignatius Loyola, 39, 137, 140, 142–45, 145, 173
Independents, 195, 204–7
India, 263, 303, 419, 420, 421–24, 422, 423, 454, 496–98, 529; Church of
  South India, 498, 518–19; Syrian Church of, 379
Individualism, 52, 254, 258, 386, 396–97, 467
Industrial Revolution, 272–73, 303, 304–6, 356, 359, 385–87, 407
Inquisition, 10, 11–13, 11, 84, 117, 119, 138, 141, 147, 152, 154, 214–15,
  218, 408, 449
Ireland, 203, 204, 207, 255, 324, 504, 526
Isasi-Díaz, Ada María, 522
Islam, 161, 162, 163, 165, 431, 432, 379, 381, 491, 492, 496
Italy, 156, 304, 353, 400, 401, 405, 409, 410, 411, 431, 432, 441; Fascism
  and war, 308, 309, 410; Protestantism, 154–56; unification, 355–58, 401

Jansenism, 214–17, 216, 239
Japan, 303, 304, 308, 309, 310, 311, 428–29, 482, 501; Christianity in, 439,
  500–502, 518, 526; Orthodox Church of, 377–78
Jefferson, Thomas, 319
Jehovah’s Witnesses, 344, 346
Jenkins, Philip, 495
Jesuits, 140, 144–45, 146, 177, 182, 213, 214, 215, 225, 451–52, 529
Jesus, 16, 24, 80, 285; Baptism and, 53; Barth’s view, 459; Communion
  and, 45, 54–55, 64, 65, 85, 223–24, 228; divinity, 159, 342;
  fundamentalism and, 342–43; historical, 389, 397; as Word of God, 47–
  50, 225
Jews, 12, 51, 159, 163, 226, 308, 310, 324, 325, 411–12, 446, 462, 474,
  476, 477, 481, 493, 496, 516
Jiménez de Cisneros, Francisco, 12, 135, 136–38, 140, 152
John of Leiden, 73–74
John of the Cross, 141–42, 143
Josephism, 213, 214, 219
Judson, Adinoram, 326, 420, 424
Justification, 52, 63, 77, 149, 235; by faith, 25, 43, 47, 51, 54, 62, 77, 222–
  23, 228, 260

Kant, Immanuel, 171, 243, 246–48, 294, 388–89, 393, 396, 459
Karlstadt, Andreas Bodenstein von, 31–32, 38, 55, 139
Khomiakov, Alexis, 377
Kierkegaard, Søren, 392–95, 394, 460
Kievan School, 377
Kimbangu, Samuel, 505–6
Kingdom of God, 41, 344, 392, 396, 460, 478
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 485–86
Knox, John, 87, 100–104
Korea, 303, 312, 377, 429, 501–2, 521, 526
Ko Tha Byu, 424

Labor movement, 359, 407–8, 413, 477, 507; worker priests, 413, 450
Lamennais, F. R. de, 400
Lampe, F. A., 262
Laski, Jan, 159
Latin America, 76, 156, 301–2, 303, 306, 363–72, 369, 436–38, 495, 507–
  12, 525; Catholicism, 368–72, 436, 507–9, 521–24, 523, 524;
  immigration, 372, 491; liberation theology, 520–21; Pentecostalism, 509–
  12, 511; Protestantism, 372, 436–38, 509–12, 511; Waldensians in, 156
Latomus, James, 138, 139
Laud, William, 200–201, 204, 280
Law and Gospel, 51–52
Leibniz, G. W., 240, 246
Leipzig: battle of, 181; Debate, 31–32, 33, 38, 55, 106, 139; Interim, 108,
  223
Liberalism, 323, 342, 343, 344, 390, 399, 403, 437, 438, 457, 458, 460,
  462, 479; economic, 343, 355–57, 359, 362; political, 308, 309, 356, 359,
  367, 370, 400, 410, 436
Liberation theologies, 449, 454, 502, 508, 520–21, 522
Life and Work, 515, 516
Livingstone, David, 434, 434
Locke, John, 240–41, 243, 245
Loissy, A. F., 408
Low Countries, 31, 110, 123, 163, 352, 353, 355; Beggars, 119–23;
  Protestants, 116–19, 123; Reformation, 115–23 ; William of Orange, 117–
  23, 118, 131, 163
Lukaris, Cyril, 160
Luther, Martin, 17, 18, 19–39, 20, 39, 64–65, 77, 90, 106, 107, 143, 173,
  228, 260, 458, 470; Bible of, 37–38, 49; “dirty reason” and, 52, 222;
  hymn, 161; on John, 51; justification by faith, 25, 43, 47, 51, 54, 62, 77,
  222–23, 228, 260; marriage of, 42–43, 43; Ninety-Five Theses, 26, 27, 28,
  29, 145, 157, 159; Papal Bull, 33, 33–35; princes’ support of, 41, 44–45,
  70; on Psalms, 24; on Romans, 24–25; theology of, 43, 47–56, 62–65, 85,
  165, 221–26
“Lutheran heresy,” 38, 137
Lutheranism, 32–35, 38, 44–45, 51, 70, 71, 85, 86, 90, 92, 116, 157, 183,
  470; in America, 325; Augsburg Confession, 45, 45–46, 46; Barmen
  Declaration, 463; church and sacraments, 52–55; church and state, 42,
  55–56, 56, 64, 151; Erasmus and, 17–18, 43–44; Formula of Concord,
  224; immigration and spread, 325, 359; Interim, 108–10; law and gospel,
  51–52; Loci theologici, 221–22; Moravians and, 263–64, 325; Nazism
  and war, 462–63; orthodoxy, 174, 175, 221–28, 260, 262, 263;
  persecution, 152–54, 157; Philippists, 221–25; Pietism and, 260–61, 262,
  268, 359; in Poland, 159, 160; predestination, 43, 44, 63, 85;
  Scandinavian, 110–13; Silesian, 470; syncretism, 226–28; Theology of
  the Cross, 50–52; War of Schmalkalden, 105–7; Word of God, 47–50. See
  also Zwingli, Ulrich Lutheran scholasticism, 224, 224–26
Luxembourg, 115, 123

Machen, J. Gresham, 476
Magdeburg, 181; Centuries of, 140, 149; Confession, 105; University, 140
Maisonfleur, Etienne de, 125
Marburg, Colloquy of, 64, 65, 85, 224
Margaret of Angouleme, 126
Martinez, Antonio José, 332
Marxism, 377, 388, 410, 465–67, 480, 521
Mather, Increase and Cotton, 283
Matter and spirit, 65, 239
Matthys, John, 72
Mayhew, Zacharias, 283
Mazarin, Jules, 187, 188
Melanchthon, Philipp, 38, 44, 45, 64–65, 85, 107, 221–24, 222, 226
Mennonites, 74–76, 195, 325
Menno Simons, 74–75, 75
Methodism, 175, 233, 259, 264–73, 267, 269, 270, 278–79, 289, 327, 328,
 332–34, 338, 339, 359, 360, 418, 419, 429, 438, 471, 480, 498, 502, 509,
 510
Methodist Episcopal Church, 273, 339; African, 335; C.M.E., 334; South,
 333
Mexico, 324, 324, 365–67, 436, 437, 491; Cristero revolution, 372;
 Revolution, 308, 367, 371, 371, 410, 474, 507, 510; Penecostals in, 510,
 511; Porfiriato, 371–72; War, 329–32, 371
Miguez Bonino, José, 394
Miller, William, 340
Milton, John, 209
Missionary societies, 326, 339, 418–19, 424
Missionaries, 144, 146, 262–64, 306, 325, 326, 335, 339, 358, 377, 378,
 409, 417–40, 450, 498, 500, 502–7, 512, 513, 514, 519, 522–24, 526, 529;
 International Missionary Council, 440, 498, 513–14, 517; Nevius
 methods, 501–2
Modernists, 342, 408
Modernity, 52, 70, 315–16, 399–415, 418, 446, 469, 527–28
Mogila, Peter, 377
Molina, Luis de, 214
Molinos, Miguel de, 217–18
Moltmann, Jurgen, 467, 488, 522
Monasticism, 9, 16, 23, 53, 92, 93, 140–45, 360
Monism, 239
Monophysites, 343–44
Montesquieu, 245
Moody, Dwight L., 337–38
Moravians, 263–64, 266, 271, 279, 325, 389, 419; Herrnhut, 263, 264, 267
More, Thomas, 90–91, 91
Mormons, 344–45, 345
Morrison, Robert, 425
Mott, John R., 440, 516
Müntzer, Thomas, 41, 72
Mussolini, Benito, 308–9, 410
Mysticism, 23, 24, 141–42, 143, 218, 396, 410, 452
Nantes, edict of, 134, 151, 163, 183, 189
Napoleon, 302, 353–55, 354, 364, 366, 400
Napoleon III, 356, 357, 371
National Council of Churches, 480, 485, 489
Nationalism, 10–11, 21, 27, 32, 52, 57, 174, 211, 311, 375, 400, 401, 458,
 463, 473–74, 491–92, 510
Native Americans, 263, 264, 283–84, 365–66
Natural religion, 174, 242, 246, 320, 461
Nazism, 308, 310, 410–12, 462, 464, 466, 481, 516
Neo-orthodoxy, 461, 480
Neoplatonism, 64
Nestorians, 378, 380, 529
Netherlands (Dutch), 65, 86, 115, 123, 179, 189, 195, 229–33, 262, 287,
 302, 304, 355, 359, 405, 419, 429, 430, 432
Nevius, John L., 501–2
Newman, John Henry, 360
New Zealand, 359, 430–31
Niebuhr, H. Richard, 478–80
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 478–80, 516
Niemöller, Martin, 463, 516
Niles, D. T., 516
Norway, 110–11, 112
Nouwen, Henri, 454
Nuclear weapons, 447, 482
Nüremburg: League of, 106; Peace of, 46, 105
Nygren, Anders, 458

Occasionalism, 239
Occultism, 251, 315, 369–70, 526–27, 527
Ochino, Bernardino, 156
Oecolampadius, 64, 154
Oglethorpe, James, 264, 266, 279
Old Catholic Church, 405, 514
Oneida community, 325
Orthodox Church, 373–83: in Asia, 377–78; Byzantine, 14, 307, 309, 373–
 75; Cypriot, 375; Diaspora, 378; Eastern, 160, 360, 382–83, 382, 439,
 448, 449; Estonian, 380–81; Greek, 325, 373–75, 376, 378, 383; Russian,
 160, 307, 376–77, 380–83, 381; in the U.S., 382–83, 382
Ottoman Empire (Turks), 161, 165, 374, 375, 379, 431; European
 invasions, 30, 56, 68, 122, 144, 157, 161; in Hungary, 157–58; Vienna
 and, 40, 46; 161
Oxford Movement, 360

Pacifism, 68, 69–74, 75, 76, 195, 254, 309, 325, 464, 473
Palatinate, 178–79, 180, 199
Palmer, Phoebe, 339, 339
Papacy, 7–8, 33, 33, 56, 162, 373, 401–15; corruption, 16, 32, 146; Fascism
  and war, 410–13, 462; French Revolution and, 399–401; Gallicanism and,
  211–14; indulgences, 24–26, 28, 60, 148; infallibility, 401–5, 442, 514;
  papal states, 161, 357–58, 401, 409; reformation of, 39–40, 144, 145–47;
  Vatican, 358, 401, 410
Parham, Charles, 340
Pascal, Blaise, 211, 215–16, 216
Peale, Norman Vincent, 484
Pelagianism, 214–15, 231
Penn, William, 256–57, 287
Pentecostalism, 340, 438, 489, 492, 501, 504–7, 506, 509–12, 511
Perón, Juan and Evita, 507
Philip of Hesse, 64, 71, 105–6, 107
Philippines and Pacific islands, 162, 313, 429–31, 502–3, 525; Filipino
  Independent Church, 429
Philippists, 221–25
Pietism, 140, 175, 259–73, 288–89, 325, 360, 418
Platonism, 16, 17, 237
Plütschau, Heinrich, 262
Poland, 131, 157, 159–60, 228, 308, 309, 411, 448, 470
Polygamy, 73, 107, 156, 345
Popes: Adrian VI, 39–40, 60–61, 146, 449; Alexander III, 216; Alexander
  VI, 136; Benedict, XV, 409; Benedict XVI, 449, 521; Clement VII, 40,
  44, 88, 146; Clement XI, 217; Clement XIII, 212; Clement XIV, 214;
  Gregory XIII, 131; Gregory XVI, 399, 400; Innocent, XI, 218; Innocent
  XII, 219; John XXIII, 441, 442–45, 517; John Paul I, 447; John Paul II,
  447–49, 524; Julius II, 8, 37; Julius III, 146; Leo X, 24–26, 27, 28, 29, 31,
  33–34, 39, 40, 90, 145–46; Leo XI, 368; Leo XII, 368, 400–401; Leo
  XIII, 405–8, 406; Marcellus II, 146; Paul III, 144, 146; Paul IV, 97, 146–
  48; Paul VI, 142, 445, 447, 508; Pius IV, 148; Pius V, 215; Pius VI, 351,
  353, 399, 400; Pius VII, 353–54, 354, 400; Pius VIII, 400; Pius IX, 324,
  357–58, 401–5, 404, 408, 409, 442; Pius X, 408, 409; Pius XI, 405, 409–
  10; Pius XII, 405, 410, 411–14, 412; Urban VIII, 215
Portugal, 162, 275, 276, 355, 363, 366, 367, 421, 429, 432, 433, 503, 504,
  526
Positivism, 370
Poor and the church, 9, 28, 70, 73, 102, 200, 201, 208, 219, 262, 310,, 312,
  314, 322, 338, 343, 359–60, 367, 417, 443, 447, 448–49, 471, 480–81,
  483, 486, 495, 504, 508–9, 519, 523, 524, 529; Rerum novarum, 406–7
Predestination, 43, 44, 63, 85, 214–17, 229–31, 235, 268, 289
Presbyterianism, 103, 196, 200, 204–9, 289, 327, 333, 334, 343, 419, 429,
  437, 487, 502, 510; Orthodox Presbyterian Church, 476
Priesthood of all believers, 52–53, 260
Printing press, 14, 21, 137, 158, 377
Probabilism, 215
Prokopovic, Feofan, 160, 377
Protestantism, 44–45, 71, 372; in Africa, 263, 335, 420, 431, 433–34, 434,
  435–36, 504–7; in Asia, 496–503; in Bohemia, 9, 30, 159, 178–82, 199;
  Catholic polemics against, 138–40; church governance, 83, 157–58, 194,
  195–96, 197, 201, 204, 208, 272, 453–54, 523; in Europe, post-war, 465–
  71; expansion in 19th century, 302–4; in France, 125–34, 182, 185–91; in
  Germany, 105–10, 158, 174, 177–84, 179, 181, 183, 199, 362, 457–71
  (see also Luther, Martin); in Great Britain, 87–104, 193–209, 457; in
  Hungary, 157–58; in Italy, 154–56; in Latin America, 372, 436–38; in
  Low Countries, 115–24; in Poland, 159–60; in Scandinavia, 110–13, 457;
  in Scotland, 99–104, 100; in Spain, 152–54, 152, 153; state religions and,
  151–60; in Switzerland, 62; theology in the 19th century, 385–97; in the
  U.S., 319–44, 473–93; WWI and aftermath, 457–62; WWII and, 462–65
Protestant Reformation, 8, 9, 12, 14, 17, 27, 28, 154, 163, 211, 263, 374,
  529; Calvin and, 77–85; Luther and, 19–55, 105–14; map, 58; radical, 67–
  76; Zwingli and, 57–66
Protestant scholasticism, 224–26
Puerto Rico, 302, 324, 438, 511–12, 528
Puritans, 94, 98, 175, 193–209, 233–35, 256, 276–84, 287; radical factions,
  206, 207

Quakers, 251, 253–57, 255, 278, 285, 287, 332–33, 361, 473
Quietism, 217–19, 271
Quimby, P. P., 346

Rahner, Karl, 453–54
Ramabai, Pandita, 424
Raphael, St., 382, 383
Rationalism, 174, 175, 217, 237–48, 320–22, 388–90, 393, 396
Rauschenbusch, Walter, 343, 397, 474
Reformed Church, 55, 56, 65, 85–86, 94, 110, 133, 151, 155, 157, 174, 175,
 178, 183, 183, 224, 260, 261, 265, 359, 463, 470; in China, 518; Dutch,
 262, 287, 359; in Eastern Europe, 470; in France, 190–91, 471; in
 Hungary, 158, 470; in India, 498; orthodoxy, 229–35, 262; Pietism and,
 262; of Scotland, 103, 104; in South Africa, 504, 521; in Yugoslavia, 470;
 Zürich Consensus, 85; Zwingli and, 62–65
Reid, James, 244
Reina, Casiodoro de, 153–54
Reuther, Rosemary R., 487
Richelieu, Cardinal, 186–87, 186, 215
Ritschl, Albrecht, 396, 397
Robinson, John A. T., 468
Romania, 308, 375
Romanticism, 321, 360, 377, 389, 460
Romero, Oscar A., 522–23, 523
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 246
Russell, Charles T., 346
Russell, Letty M., 487
Russia: Catholicism in, 376, 380; Ivan IV, 376; Mennonites in, 75; Old
 Believers schism, 376; Orthodox Church, 160, 376–77, 378, 380–83, 381;
 Peter the Great, 376; Revolution, 306–7, 377; Slavophile movement, 377.
 See also Soviet Union Rutherford, Joseph F., 346

Sacraments, 8, 17, 22, 23, 52–55, 64–65, 74, 79, 80, 83, 85, 98, 148, 193,
  230, 252, 254, 259, 271, 272, 332, 368, 452, 514
Saint-Cyran, 215
Salvation Army, 338, 360, 387
Sanctification, 77, 185, 234, 260–61, 338, 339
Scandinavia, 110–13, 325, 355, 457, 458, 467
Schell, Hermann, 408
Schleiermacher, Friedrich, 459, 388–90, 396
Schweitzer, Albert, 385, 397
Scofield, Cyrus, 343
Scotland, 86, 87, 193, Church of, 103, 200–201; James IV, 99; Mary Stuart,
  98–104, 193, 196; Presbyterianism, 103, 196, 200–201, 204, 206–7;
  Reformed Church, 65, 103, 104; Reformation in, 99–104, 100
Second Great Awakening, 326–28, 328; Cane Ridge Revival, 327
Secularism, 315, 442, 457–58, 467, 470–71, 507–8
Segundo, Juan Luis, 521, 521
Servetus, Michael, 83–84
Seventh Day Adventists, 340–41
Seventh Day Baptists, 340
Seymour, William J., 340
Shakers, 325–26
Siam, 424
Sin, 8, 23–24, 44, 51, 52, 55, 63, 143, 215, 223, 232, 234, 266, 268, 288,
  320, 401, 461, 479
Slavery, 278, 284, 288, 295, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 330, 331, 332–36,
  361–62, 426, 434
Smith, Joseph, 344–45
Smyth, John, 195
Social Gospel, 343, 397, 474, 476
Socialism, 311, 355, 387, 407, 460, 477, 479, 480–81, 482
Socinius, Faustus, 159
Söderblom, Nathan, 458, 515
Soul, 27, 93, 97, 141, 217, 239–40, 244, 245, 246, 247, 388, 396, 458
South Africa, 311, 359, 497, 432, 439, 504, 520, 521
Soviet Union, 499; Cold War, 312, 413, 466, 482, 484, 491, 498, 517;
  Communism, 410, 412, 448, 466, 480, 482; fall, 380–83, 448, 470, 491,
  492, 521; religion and, 307, 312, 375, 377, 379, 380–83, 410, 465, 470;
  WWII, 309, 428, 429
Spain, 10, 87, 355; Catholic reformation in, 135–38, 152; Civil War and
  Franco, 308, 346, 410, 413; colonies, 162, 275, 302, 363–72, 432, 436;
  England and, 87–92; Ferdinand II, 10, 12, 87, 135–38; Ferdinand VII,
  356, 364, 368; Inquisition, 10, 117, 152, 154; Isabella, 7, 11, 12, 87, 108,
  111, 135–38, 136, 140, 152, 185; Islam, 163; Low Countries and, 115–23;
  persecutions, 12; Philip II, 94, 110, 116–19, 122–23, 131, 133; Philip IV,
  183; Protestantism, 152–54, 152, 153; Reconquista, 161
Spener, Philip Jakob, 259–61, 262
Spinoza, Baruch, 239
Spire, Diet of, 44, 71
Spiritualism, 41, 249–58, 285, 346
Stanley, Ann Lee, 325
Stoicism, 16, 17
Strasbourg, 68, 72–73, 80, 81, 82, 94, 107, 126, 452
Student Christian Movement, 514
Sunday school movement, 337, 360, 387
Sweden, 110–13, 180–82, 239; Gustavus Adolphus, 180–82
Swedenborg, Emanuel, 249, 257–58
Switzerland, 41, 57–62, 68, 71, 78, 155, 157, 189, 190, 352, 353, 356, 419,
  459, 460, 463, 514. See also Geneva; Zürich Syrian Monophysite Church
  (Jacobite), 379

Taylor, J. Hudson, 426–27
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 413, 450–51, 452, 453
Temperance movement, 295, 307, 326–27, 438, 487
Temple, William, 514–15
Teresa of Avila, St., 135, 140–42, 141, 142
Tetzel, John, 27, 29
Theology of the Cross, 50–52
Theology of Glory, 50
Theresa of Calcutta, 454
Thérèse of Lisieux, 409
Thirty Years’ War, 110, 158, 174, 177–84, 179, 181, 183, 466
Thomson, James, 437
Thurneysen, Edouard, 459, 460
Tillich, Paul, 468, 480
Tindal, Matthew, 242
Tokes, Laszlo, 470
Toland, John, 242, 244
Tolerance (religious), 70, 73, 109–10, 122, 137–38, 159, 174, 180–84, 187,
  190–91, 209, 232, 241, 246, 256–57, 276, 279, 284–85, 287–88, 323, 324,
  349, 370, 436, 446; Edict of Nantes, 134, 151, 163, 183, 189; Peace of
  Westphalia, 182–84, 183
Torquemada, 10, 11–12
Transcendentalism, 321
Transubstantiation, 54
Transylvania, 157, 158, 159
Trent, Council of, 108, 118–19, 146, 147–49, 148, 162, 211, 411, 413, 441
Trinity, 17, 48, 79, 84, 156, 159, 233, 320, 346, 392, 510

Ultramontanism, 212, 405
Uniates, 431–32, 497
Unitarianism, 157, 158, 159, 160, 320–21
United States, 65, 319–47, 429, 473–93; Christianity decline, 492, 495;
 Civil rights movement, 313, 484–85, 485; Civil War and slavery, 332–36;
 Cold War, 312, 413, 466, 482, 484, 491, 498, 517; cultural diversity, 492–
 93, 495; ecumenism, 519; feminism, 307, 339, 421, 487; Great
 Depression, 477–81; immigration issues, 491–92; Ku Klux Klan and
 xenophobia, 324, 474, 475; Latinos, 522; Manifest Destiny and Mexican
 War, 329–31, 495; McCarthy era, 482; post-war decades, 482–90;
 Prohibition, 307, 476, 489; Red Scare, 474; revivals, 327, 328, 337–38,
 339, 426–28, 482–83, 483; Second Great Awakening, 326–28, 328;
 Spanish-American War, 429; Temperance, 295, 326–37, 438, 487; 21st
 century, 491–93; Vietnam War, 486, 487–88; WWI, 344, 346, 473–77;
 WWII, 309. See also America, Colonial; Evangelicalism;
 Fundamentalism; specific denominations Universalism, 302, 320, 325
Valdés, Juan de, 156
Valenzuela, Romana Carbajal de, 510
Valera, Cipriano de, 154
Vargas, Getulio, 508
Vespuci, Amerigo, 162
Voltaire, 191, 245–46, 353
Von Bora, Katharina, 42–43, 43

Waldensians, 151, 154–56
Waldo, Peter, 154
Wales, 268
Wesley, Charles, 266, 270, 272
Wesley, John, 259, 261, 264–73, 265, 279, 289, 322, 338, 340
Wesley, Susanna, 265, 269, 270
Westminster: Assembly, 204, 229, 233; Confession, 193, 209; 233–35, 233,
 282, 288
Westphal, Joachim, 85
White, Ellen, Harmon, 340–41
Whitefield, George, 267–68, 279, 289
White man’s burden, 310, 312, 417, 495
Wilberforce, William, 361
Willard, Frances, 326–27
Williams, Delores, 522
Williams, Roger, 275, 284–85
Wittenberg; Castle Church, 27, 29, 144; Concord, 85
Women: African, 507; Anabaptists and, 70; in the church, 487: education
 of, India, 424; feminism, 313, 327, 339, 421, 487, 488, 520; first Luther
 supporter, 32; holiness movement, 339; Methodist, 265, 269, 269–70,
 270; missionary societies, 420–21; ordination, 448, 487; in Protestant
 Italy, 156; Quakers, 255, rights of, 307, 313, 326–27, 487; Shakers, 325;
 witchcraft, 282–83; womanist theology, 487, 520, 522
Word of God, 47–50, 53, 87, 165, 174, 225–26, 461–62
World Council of Churches, 379–80, 381, 440, 489, 498, 512–19, 516, 526
World Missionary Conference, 439, 440, 512, 513, 514
World War I, 306, 307–8, 336, 344, 346, 408, 409, 414, 415, 421, 431, 438,
 440, 450, 457–62, 473–74, 477, 478, 514, 515
World War II, 308–10, 309, 312–13, 375, 410–11, 462–65, 466, 468, 474,
 478, 480, 481, 498, 502, 503, 504, 513, 516, 518
Worms: Diet of, 34, 35, 39, 44, 60, 112, 152–53; Edict of, 37
Wycliffe, John, 9, 78, 90

Young, Brigham, 345, 345
Young Men’s/Women’s Christian Association (YMCA/YWCA), 337–38,
 360, 387

Ziegenbalg, B., 263
Zinzendorf, Nikolas Ludwig von, 263–64
Zürich, 59–62, 68–71, 68, 101, 156; “brethren” of, 69; Consensus, 85
Zwingli, Ulrich, 55, 57–65, 63, 67, 68, 69–70, 85, 94, 101, 157, 224
Zwinglianism, 93, 97, 157
                     About the Author


JUSTO L. GONZÁLEZ, retired professor of historical theology and
author of the highly praised three-volume History of Christian Thought,
attended United Seminary in Cuba and was the youngest person to be
awarded a Ph.D. in historical theology at Yale University. Over the past
thirty years he has focused on developing programs for the theological
education of Hispanics, and he has received four honorary doctorates.

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins authors.
                              Credits


Page 10 / Courtesy of the author
Page 11 / Courtesy the Museo de la Inquisición y del Congreso, Lima.
Photograph by the author Page 13 / Frontispiece of Galileo’s Dialogo;
Burndy Library Page 15 / Erasmus, engraving by Dürer; Metropolitan
Museum of Art (NY) Page 20 / Martin Luther, by Lucas Cranach;
Nationalmuseum, Stockholm (Sweden) Page 28 / Courtesy of the JKM
Library of the Lutheran School of Theology at Chicago and McCormick
Theological Seminary. Photograph by the author Page 33 / Courtesy of the
JKM Library of the Lutheran School of Theology at Chicago and
McCormick Theological Seminary. Photograph by the author Page 39 /
Photo by the author
Page 45 / Augsburg Confession; Kunststammlungen Page 49 / Courtesy of
the JKM Library of the Lutheran School of Theology at Chicago and
McCormick Theological Seminary. Photograph by the author Page 56 /
Courtesy of the JKM Library of the Lutheran School of Theology at
Chicago and McCormick Theological Seminary. Photograph by the author
Page 59 / Ulrich Zwingli; Institut fur Kunstwissenschaft Zürich Page 63 /
Zentralbibliothek Zürich
Page 72 / Lancaster Mennonite Historical Society Archives, Lancaster, Pa.
Page 75 / Lancaster Mennonite Historical Society Archives, Lancaster, Pa.
Page 79 / John Calvin; Bibliothèque Publique et Universitaire de Genève
Page 83 / Geneva. Photograph by the author
Page 89 / Henry VIII, Leeds College; National Portrait Gallery Page 91 /
Sir Thomas More, after Holbein; National Portrait Gallery Page 95 / Mary
I, by Master John; National Portrait Gallery Page 100 / Photograph by the
author
Page 109 / Charles V, by Titian, Prado, Madrid; Alinari/Art Resource, NY
Page 118 / William of Orange, by A. Th. Key; Rijksmuseum-Stichting Page
126 / Catherine de Medici; Bibliothèque Nationale Page 130 / St.
Bartholomew’s Massacre 1572. Photograph by the author Page 133 /
Bibliothèque Publique et Universitaire de Genève Page 136 / Coronation of
Queen Isabella; Alcázar de Segovia. Photograph by the author Page 138 /
Courtesy of the JKM Library of the Lutheran School of Theology at
Chicago and McCormick Theological Seminary. Photograph by the author
Page 139 / Photograph by the author
Page 141 / Photograph by the author
Page 142 / Photograph by the author
Page 143 / Photograph by the author
Page 145 / Polychromed and gilded wood. Museum Acquisition Fund,
Meadows Museum, Meadows School of the Arts, Southern Methodist
University. Accession number 87.15.
Page 148 / Council of Trent 1565; Bettmann Archives.
Page 149 / C. Benton Kline, Jr. Special Collections and Archives, John
Bulow Campbell Library, Columbia Theological Seminary.
Page 149 / Courtesy of the JKM Library of the Lutheran School of
Theology at Chicago and McCormick Theological Seminary. Photograph
by the author Page 152 / Photograph by the author
Page 153 / Courtesy of the Instituto Superior de Estudios Teológicos,
Buenos Aires.
Page 175 / Public domain
Page 179 / Defenestration of Prague 1618; Ullstein Bilderdienst Page 181 /
Count Wallenstein; Bettmann Archives
Page 186 / Richelieu; Giraudon/Art Resource, NY
Page 188 / Mazarin; Bettmann Archives
Page 197 / James I; Library of Congress (public domain) Page 202 / Charles
I; National Portrait Gallery
Page 205 / Oliver Cromwell, by R. Walker; National Portrait Gallery Page
213 / Bibliothèque Nationale
Page 216 / Pascal; Photograph by the author
Page 222 / Melanchthon, by Lucas Cranach; Alinari/Art Resource, NY
Page 227 / Courtesy of the JKM Library of the Lutheran School of
Theology at Chicago and McCormick Theological Seminary. Photograph
by the author Page 234 / Westminster Assembly; Photograph by the author
Page 243 / Hume; Photograph by the author
Page 265 / John Wesley, by N. Hone; National Portrait Gallery Page 267 /
Reproduced with permission from the Methodist Collections at Drew
University Page 290 / Jonathan Edwards; Library of Congress
Page 315 / Photograph by the author
Page 328 / Library of Congress
Page 335 / Library of Congress (public domain)
Page 336 / Reproduced with permission from the Methodist Collections at
Drew University Page 339 / Reproduced with permission from the
Methodist Collections at Drew University Page 341 / Photograph by the
author
Page 345 / Brigham Young; Brigham Young University
Page 354 / Coronation of Napoleon, by David; Cliché des Musées
Nationaux—Paris Page 361 / Shelters for the poor. Engraving by Doré; The
British Library Page 365 / Simón Bolívar; Bettmann Archives
Page 371 / Photograph by the author
Page 382 / Courtesy of the Antiochian Orthodox Church of Atlanta;
Photograph by the author Page 394 / Kierkegaard; Det Nationalhistoriske
Museum på Frederiksborg Page 419 / William Carey; The Granger
Collection
Page 423 / The Granger Collection
Page 430 / Monument in Vancouver, B.C. Photograph by the author.
Page 434 / Photograph by the author
Page 485 / Martin Luther King leading a march, U.S. Information Agency
(public domain) Page 501 / Courtesy of the author
Page 527 / Photograph by the author
Page 528 / Photograph by the author
 Books by Justo L. Gonzalez


The Story of Christianity: Volume 1

The Story of Christianity: Volume 2
                            Copyright


THE STORY OF CHRISTIANITY VOLUME II:  The Reformation to the Present Day.
Revised and Updated. Copyright © 2010 by Justo L. González. All rights
reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By
payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive,
nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen.
No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded,
decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any
information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means,
whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented,
without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.

          HarperCollins Web site: http://www.harpercollins.com
               HarperCollins®, ® and HarperCollins™
                    are trademarks of HarperCollins



SECOND EDITION

   Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon
                                request.

                           978-0-06-185589-4
                         ISBN
          EPUB Edition December 2014 ISBN 9780062364906
11 12 13 14 15 RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
                 About the Publisher

       Australia HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
     Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
                   http://www.harpercollins.com.au

                                 Canada
                          HarperCollins Canada
   2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada
                      http://www.harpercollins.ca

New Zealand HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand Unit D, 63 Apollo
                             Drive
                         Rosedale 0632
                    Auckland, New Zealand
                 http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

           United Kingdom HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
                    77-85 Fulham Palace Road
                       London, W6 8JB, UK
                  http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

             United States HarperCollins Publishers Inc.


195 Broadway
    New York, NY 10007
http://www.harpercollins.com
